Jonathan Harker's Journal. 3 May. Bistritz.
Left Munich at 8.35 p.m. on 1 May, arriving at Vienna early next morning. Should have arrived at 6.46, but train was an hour late.
Budapest seems a wonderful place from the glimpse which I got of it from the train, and the little I could walk through the streets.
I feared to go very far from the station, as we had arrived late, and would start as near the correct time as possible.
The impression I had was that we were leaving the west, and entering the east.
The most western of splendid bridges over the Danube, which is here of noble width and depth, took us among the traditions of Turkish rule.
We left in pretty good time, and came after nightfall to Claussenburg. Here I stopped for the night at the Hotel Royale.
I had for dinner, or rather supper, a chicken done up some way with red pepper, which was very good but thirsty.
Memorandum. Get recipe for Mina.
I asked the waiter, and he said it was called Paprika Händel, and that, as it was a national dish, I should be able to get it anywhere along the Carpathians.
I found my smattering of German very useful here. Indeed, I don't know how I should be able to get on without it.
Having had some time at my disposal when in London, I had visited the British Museum, and made search among the books and maps in the library regarding Transylvania.
It had struck me that some foreknowledge of the country could hardly fail to have some importance in dealing with a nobleman of that country.
I find that the district he named is in the extreme east of the country, just on the borders of three states—Transylvania, Moldavia, and Bukovina, in the midst of the Carpathian mountains, one of the wildest and least known portions of Europe.
I was not able to light on any map or work giving the exact locality of the Castle Dracula, as there are no maps of this country as yet to compare with our own ordnance survey maps, but I found that Bistritz, the post-town named by Count Dracula, is a fairly well-known place.
I shall enter here some of my notes, as they may refresh my memory when I talk over my travels with Mina.
In the population of Transylvania there are four distinct nationalities—Saxons in the south, and mixed with them the Wallachs, who are the descendants of the Dacians, Magyars in the west, and Zekalys in the east and north.
I am going among the latter, who claim to be descended from Attila and the Huns. This may be so, for when the Magyars conquered the country in the eleventh century they found the Huns settled in it.
I read that every known superstition in the world is gathered into the horseshoe of the Carpathians, as if it were the centre of some sort of imaginative whirlpool. If so, my stay may be very interesting.
Memorandum. I must ask the Count all about them.
I did not sleep well, though my bed was comfortable enough, for I had all sorts of queer dreams. There was a dog howling all night under my window, which may have had something to do with it, or it may have been the paprika, for I had to drink up all the water in my carafe, and was still thirsty.
Towards morning I slept, and was wakened by the continuous knocking at my door, so I guess I must have been sleeping soundly then.
I had for breakfast more paprika, and a sort of porridge of maize flour, which they said was mamaliga, and eggplant stuffed with force-meat, a very excellent dish, which they call impletata. Memorandum. Get recipe for this also.
I had to hurry breakfast, for the train started a little before eight, or rather it ought to have done so, for after rushing to the station at seven thirty I had to sit in the carriage for more than an hour before we began to move.
It seems to me that the further east you go the more unpunctual are the trains. What ought they to be in China?
All day long we seemed to dawdle through a country which was full of beauty of every kind. Sometimes we saw little towns or castles on the top of steep hills, such as we see in old missiles.
Sometimes we ran by rivers and streams, which seemed from the wide stony margin on each side of them to be subject to great floods. It takes a lot of water, and running strong, to sweep the outside edge of a river clear.
At every station there were groups of people, sometimes crowds, and in all sorts of attire. Some of them were just like the peasants at home, or those I saw coming through France and Germany, with short jackets and round hats and home-made trousers, but others were very picturesque.
The women looked pretty, except when you got near them, but they were very clumsy about the waist. They had all full white sleeves of some kind or other, and most of them had big belts, with a lot of strips of something fluttering from them, like the dresses in a ballet, but of course there were petticoats under them.
The strangest figures we saw were the Slovaks, who were more barbarian than the rest, with their big cowboy hats, great baggy, dirty white trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous heavy leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all studded over with brass nails.
They wore high boots with their trousers tucked into them, and had long black hair and heavy black mustaches. They are very picturesque, but do not look prepossessing. On the stage they would be set down at once as some old oriental band of brigands. They are, however, I am told, very harmless, and rather wanting in natural self-assertion.
It was on the dark side of twilight when we got to Bistritz, which is a very interesting old place. Being practically on the frontier, for the Borgo Pass leads from it into Bukovina, it has had a very stormy existence, and it certainly shows marks of it.
Fifty years ago a series of great fires took place, which made terrible havoc on five separate occasions. At the very beginning of the seventeenth century it underwent a siege of three weeks, and lost thirteen thousand people, the casualties of war proper being assisted by famine and disease.
Count Dracula had directed me to go to the Golden Crone Hotel, which I found, to my great delight, to be thoroughly old-fashioned, for, of course, I wanted to see all I could of the ways of the country.
I was evidently expected, for, when I got near the door, I faced a cheery-looking elderly woman in the usual peasant dress, white undergarment, with a long double apron, front and back, of coloured stuff, fitting almost too tight for modesty.
When I came close, she bowed, and said—
The Hare Englishman?
Yes, I said. Jonathan Harker.
She smiled, and gave some message to an elderly man in white shirt-sleeves, who had followed her to the door.
He went, but immediately returned with a letter.
My friend, welcome to the Carpathians. I am anxiously expecting you. Sleep well to-night. At three to-morrow the diligence will start for Bukovina. A place on it is kept for you. At the Borgo Pass my carriage will await you, and will bring you to me.
I trust that your journey from London has been a happy one, and that you will enjoy your stay in my beautiful land. Your friend, Dracula.
4th of May.
I found that my landlord had got a letter from the Count, directing him to secure the best place on the coach for me, but on making inquiries as to details he seemed somewhat reticent, and pretended that he could not understand my German. This could not be true, because up to then he had understood it perfectly. At least he answered my questions exactly as if he did.
He and his wife, the old lady who had received me, looked at each other in a frightened sort of way. He mumbled out that the money had been sent in a letter, and that was all he knew. When I asked him if he knew Count Dracula, and could tell me anything of his castle, both he and his wife crossed themselves, and, saying that they knew nothing at all, simply refused to speak further.
It was so near the time of starting that I had no time to ask anyone else, for it was all very mysterious, and not by any means comforting.
Just before I was leaving, an old lady came up to my room, and said in a hysterical way,
Must you go? Oh, young Herr, must you go?
She was in such an excited state that she seemed to have lost her grip of what German she knew, and mixed it all up with some other language which I did not know at all.
I was just able to follow her by asking many questions. When I told her that I must go at once, and that I was engaged on important business, she asked again,
Do you know what day it is?
I answered that it was the fourth of May. She shook her head as she said again,
Oh yes, I know that, I know that, but do you know what day it is?
On my saying that I did not understand, she went on,
It is the eve of St. George's Day. Do you not know that tonight, when the clock strikes midnight, all the evil things in the world will have full sway?
Do you know where you are going, and what you are going to?
She was in such evident distress that I tried to comfort her, but without effect.
Finally she went down on her knees and implored me not to go, at least to wait a day or two before starting.
It was all very ridiculous, but I did not feel comfortable. However, there was business to be done, and I could allow nothing to interfere with it.
I tried to raise her up, and said, as gravely as I could, that I thanked her, but my duty was imperative, and that I must go.
She then rose, and dried her eyes, and taking a crucifix from her neck, offered it to me.
I did not know what to do, for, as an English churchman, I have been taught to regard such things as in some measure idolatrous,
and yet it seemed so ungracious to refuse an old lady meaning so well, and in such a state of mind.
She saw, I suppose, the doubt in my face, for she put the rosary round my neck, and said,
For your mother's sake, and went out of the room.
I am writing up this part of the diary whilst I am waiting for the coach, which is, of course, late, and the crucifix is still round my neck.
Whether it is the old lady's fear, or the many ghostly traditions of this place, or the crucifix itself, I do not know, but I am not feeling nearly as easy in my mind as usual.
If this book should ever reach Mina before I do, let it bring my good-bye.
Here comes the coach.
5th of May. The Castle.
The grey of the morning has passed, and the sun is high over the distant horizon, which seems jagged, whether with trees or hills I know not, for it is so far off that big things and little are mixed.
I am not sleepy, and, as I am not to be called till I awake, naturally I write till sleep comes.
There are many odd things to put down, and, lest who reads them may fancy that I dined too well before I left Bistritz, let me put down my dinner exactly.
I dined on what they called robber steak, bits of bacon, onion, and beef, seasoned with red pepper and strung on sticks, and roasted over the fire in simple style of the London cat's meat.
The wine was golden mediash, which produces a queer sting on the tongue, which is, however, not disagreeable. I had only a couple of glasses of this, and nothing else.
When I got on the coach, the driver had not taken his seat, and I saw him talking to the landlady.
They were evidently talking of me, for every now and then they looked at me, and some of the people who were sitting on the bench outside the door came and listened, and then looked at me, most of them pityingly.
I could hear a lot of words often repeated, queer words, for there were many nationalities in the crowd, so I quietly got my polyglot dictionary from my bag and looked them out.
I must say they were not cheering to me, for amongst them were Ordog, Satan, Pokol, Hell, Stregoyka, Witch, Vrolok, and Vlkoslak, both mean the same thing, one being Slovak, and the other Serbian, for something that is either werewolf or vampire.
Memorandum. I must ask the Count about these superstitions.
When we started, the crowd round the inn door, which had by this time swelled to a considerable size, all made the sign of the cross, and pointed two fingers towards me.
With some difficulty I got a fellow passenger to tell me what they meant. He would not answer at first, but on learning that I was English, he explained that it was a charm, or guard, against the evil eye.
This was not very pleasant for me, just starting for an unknown place to meet an unknown man, but every one seemed so kind-hearted, and so sorrowful, and so sympathetic, that I could not but be touched.
I shall never forget the last glimpse which I had of the inn yard, and its crowd of picturesque figures, all crossing themselves, as they stood round the wide archway, with its background of rich foliage of oleander and orange trees in green tubs, clustered in the centre of the yard.
Then our driver, whose wide linen drawers covered the whole front of the box-seat, Gotze, they call them, cracked his big quip over his four small horses, which ran abreast, and we set off on our journey.
I soon lost sight and recollection of ghostly fears in the beauty of the scene as we drove along, although had I known the language, or rather languages, which my fellow passengers were speaking, I might not have been able to throw them off so easily.
Before us lay a green sloping land full of forests and woods, with here and there steep hills, crowned with clumps of trees or with farmhouses, the blank gable end to the road.
There was everywhere a bewildering mass of fruit blossom, apple, plum, pear, cherry.
And as we drove by I could see the green grass under the trees, spangled with the fallen petals.
In and out amongst these green hills of what they call here the middle land, ran the road, losing itself as it swept round the grassy curve, or was shut out by the straggling ends of pine woods, which here and there ran down the hillsides like tongues of flame.
The road was rugged, but still we seemed to fly over it with a feverish haste.
I could not understand then what the haste meant, but the driver was evidently bent on losing no time in reaching Borgo Prund.
I was told that this road is in summertime excellent, but that it had not yet been put in order after the winter snows.
In this respect it is different from the general run of roads in the Carpathians, for it is an old tradition that they are not to be kept in too good order.
Of old the hospidars would not repair them, lest the Turk should think that they were preparing to bring in foreign troops, and so hasten the war, which was always really at loading point.
Beyond the green swelling hills of the middle land rose mighty slopes of forest up to the lofty steeps of the Carpathians themselves.
Right and left of us they towered, with the afternoon sun falling full upon them, and bringing out all the glorious colours of this beautiful range.
Deep blue and purple in the shadows of the peaks, green and brown where grass and rock mingled, and an endless perspective of jagged rock and pointed crags, till these were themselves lost in the distance where the snowy peaks rose grandly.
Here and there seemed mighty rifts in the mountains through which, as the sun began to sink, we saw now and again the white gleam of falling water.
One of my companions touched my arm as we swept round the base of a hill, and opened up the lofty snow-covered peak of a mountain, which seemed, as we wound on our serpentine way, to be right before us.
Look!—Istenzek!—God's seat!—and he crossed himself reverently.
As we wound on our endless way, and the sun sank lower and lower behind us, the shadows of the evening began to creep round us.
This was emphasised by the fact that the snowy mountaintop still held the sunset, and seemed to glow out with a delicate cool pink.
Here and there we passed Czechs and Slovaks, all in picturesque attire, but I noticed that Goethe was painfully prevalent.
By the roadside were many crosses, and as we swept by my companions all crossed themselves.
Here and there was a peasant man or a woman, kneeling before a shrine, who did not even turn round as we approached, but seemed, in the self-surrender of devotion, to have neither eyes nor ears for the outer world.
There were many things new to me, for instance hay-ricks in the trees, and here and there very beautiful masses of weeping birch, their white stems shining like silver through the delicate green of the leaves.
Now and again we passed a Leiterwagen, the ordinary peasant's cart, with its long snake-like vertebra, calculated to suit the inequalities of the road.
On this were sure to be seated quite a group of homecoming peasants, the Czechs with their white, and the Slovaks with their collared sheepskins, the latter carrying lance fashion their long staves, with axe at end.
As the evening fell it began to get very cold, and the growing twilight seemed to merge into one dark mistiness with gloom of the trees, oak, beech, and pine, though in the valleys which ran deep between the spurs of the hills, as we ascended through the pass, the dark firs stood out here and there against the background of late-lying snow.
Sometimes, as the road was cut through the pine woods that seemed in the darkness to be closing down upon us, great masses of greyness which here and there bestrewed the trees, produced a peculiarly weird and solemn effect, which carried on the thoughts and grim fancies engendered earlier in the evening, when the falling sunset threw into strange relief the ghost-like clouds, which amongst the Carpathians seemed to wind ceaselessly through the valleys.
Sometimes the hills were so steep that, despite our driver's haste, the horses could only go slowly. I wished to get down and walk up them as we do at home, but the driver would not hear of it.
No, no, he said, you must not walk here, the dogs are too fierce.
And then he added, with what he evidently meant for grim pleasantry, for he looked round to catch the approving smile of the rest.
And you may have enough of such matters before you go to sleep.
The only stop he would make was a moment's pause to light his lamps.
When it grew dark there seemed to be some excitement amongst the passengers, and they kept speaking to him, one after the other, as though urging him to further speed.
He lashed the horses unmercifully with his long whip, and with wild cries of encouragement urged them on to further exertions.
Then, through the darkness, I could see a sort of patch of grey light ahead of us, as though there were a cleft in the hills.
The excitement of the passengers grew greater. The crazy coach rocked on its great leather springs, and swayed like a boat tossed on a stormy sea.
I had to hold on. The road grew more level, and we appeared to fly along. Then the mountains seemed to come nearer to us on each side, and to frown down upon us.
We were entering on the Borgo Pass.
One by one several of the passengers offered me gifts, which they pressed upon me with an earnestness which would take no denial.
These were certainly of an odd and varied kind, but each was given in simple good faith, with a kindly word and a blessing,
and that same strange mixture of fear-meaning movements which I had seen outside the hole at Bistritz, the sign of the cross, and the guard against the evil eye.
Then, as we flew along, the driver leaned forward, and on each side the passengers, craning over the edge of the coach, peered eagerly into the darkness.
It was evident that something very exciting was either happening or expected, but though I asked each passenger, no one would give me the slightest explanation.
This state of excitement kept on for some little time, and at last we saw before us the pass opening out on the eastern side.
There were dark rolling clouds overhead, and in the air the heavy oppressive sense of thunder.
It seemed as though the mountain range had separated two atmospheres, and that now we had got into the thunderous one.
I was now myself looking out for the conveyance which was to take me to the Count.
Each moment I expected to see the glare of lamps through the blackness, but all was dark.
The only light was the flickering rays of our own lamps, in which the steam from our hard-driven horses rose in a white cloud.
We could see now the sandy road lying white before us, but there was on it no sign of a vehicle.
The passengers drew back with a sigh of gladness, which seemed to mock my own disappointment.
I was already thinking what I had best to do, when the driver, looking at his watch, said to the others something which I could hardly hear.
It was spoken so quietly, and in so low a tone. I thought it was—
An hour less than the time.
Then, turning to me, he spoke in German worse than my own.
There is no carriage here. The hare is not expected after all.
He will now come on to Bukovina, and return to-morrow, or the next day, better the next day.
Whilst he was speaking, the horses began to neigh, and snort, and plunge wildly, so that the driver had to hold them up.
Then, amongst a chorus of screams from the peasants, and a universal crossing of themselves, a kalish, with four horses, drove up behind us, overtook us, and drew up beside the coach.
I could see from the flash of our lamps, as the rays fell on them, that the horses were coal-black, and splendid animals.
They were driven by a tall man, with a long brown beard, and a great black hat, which seemed to hide his face from us.
I could only see the gleam of a pair of very bright eyes, which seemed red in the lamplight, as he turned to us.
He said to the driver,
You are early to-night, my friend.
The man stammered in reply,
The English hare was in a hurry.
To which the stranger replied,
That is why, I suppose, you wished him to go on to Bukovina. You cannot deceive me, my friend. I know too much, and my horses are swift.
As he spoke, he smiled, and the lamplight fell on a hard-looking mouth, with very red lips, and sharp-looking teeth, as white as ivory.
One of my companions whispered to another the line from Berger's Lenore,
Denn die Toten reiten schnell,
For the dead travel fast.
The strange driver evidently heard the words, for he looked up with a gleaming smile.
The passenger turned his face away, at the same time putting out his two fingers, and crossing himself.
Give me the hare's luggage, said the driver, and with exceeding alacrity my bags were handed out, and put in the kalesh.
Then I descended from the side of the coach, as the kalesh was close alongside, the driver helping me with a hand which caught my arm in a grip of steel. His strength must have been prodigious.
Without a word he shook the reins, the horses turned, and we swept into the darkness of the pass.
As I looked back I saw the steam from the horses of the coach by the light of the lamps, and projected against it the figures of my late companions crossing themselves.
Then the driver cracked his whip, and called to his horses, and off they swept on their way to Bukovina.
As they sank into the darkness I felt a strange chill, and a lonely feeling came over me.
But a cloak was thrown over my shoulders, and a rug across my knees, and the driver said in excellent German.
The night is chill, mine hare, and my master the Count bade me take all care of you.
There is a flask of slivovits, the plum brandy of the country, underneath the seat, if you should require it.
I did not take any, but it was a comfort to know it was there all the same.
I felt a little strangely, and not a little frightened.
I think had there been any alternative I should have taken it, instead of prosecuting that unknown night journey.
The carriage went at a hard pace straight along, then we made a complete turn, and went along another straight road.
It seemed to me that we were simply going over and over the same ground again, and so I took note of some salient point, and found that this was so.
I would have liked to have asked the driver what this all meant, but I really feared to do so, for I thought that, placed as I was, any protest would have had no effect in case there had been an intention to delay.
By and by, however, as I was curious to know how time was passing, I struck a match, and by its flame looked at my watch.
It was within a few minutes of midnight. This gave me a sort of shock, for I suppose the general superstition about midnight was increased by my recent experiences.
I waited, with a sick feeling of suspense.
Then a dog began to howl somewhere in a farmhouse far down the road, a long, agonised wailing, as if from fear.
The sound was taken up by another dog, and then another and another, till, borne on the wind, which now sighed softly through the pass, a wild howling began, which seemed to come from all over the country, as far as the imagination could grasp it, through the gloom of the night.
At the first howl the horses began to strain and rear, but the driver spoke to them soothingly, and they quieted down, but shivered and sweated, as though after a runaway from sudden fright.
Then far off in the distance, from the mountains on each side of us, began a louder and a sharper howling, that of wolves, which affected both the horses and myself in the same way, for I was minded to jump from the calèche and run, whilst they reared again and plunged madly, so that the driver had to use all his great strength to keep them from bolting.
In a few minutes, however, my own ears got accustomed to the sound, and the horses so far became quiet that the driver was able to descend, and to stand before them.
He petted and soothed them, and whispered something in their ears, as I have heard of horse tamers doing, and with extraordinary effect, for under his caresses they became quite manageable again, though they still trembled.
The driver again took his seat, and, shaking his reins, started off at a great pace. This time, after going to the far side of the pass, he suddenly turned down a narrow roadway, which ran sharply to the right.
Soon we were hemmed in with trees, which in places arched right over the roadway till we passed, as through a tunnel. And again great frowning rocks guarded us boldly on either side.
Though we were in shelter, we could hear the rising wind, for it moaned and whistled through the rocks, and the branches of the trees crashed together as we swept along.
It grew colder and colder still, and fine, powdery snow began to fall, so that soon we and all around us were covered with a white blanket.
The keen wind still carried the howling of the dogs, though this grew fainter as we went on our way.
The baying of the wolves sounded nearer and nearer, as though they were closing round on us from every side.
I grew dreadfully afraid, and the horses shared my fear. The driver, however, was not in the least disturbed. He kept turning his head to left and right, but I could not see anything through the darkness.
Suddenly, away on our left, I saw a faint flickering blue flame. The driver saw it at the same moment. He at once checked the horses, and, jumping to the ground, disappeared into the darkness.
I did not know what to do, the less as the howling of the wolves grew closer, but, while I wondered, the driver suddenly reappeared again, and without a word took his seat, and we resumed our journey.
I think I must have fallen asleep and kept dreaming of the incident, for it seemed to be repeated endlessly, and now, looking back, it is like a sort of awful nightmare.
Once the flame appeared so near the road that even in the darkness around us I could watch the driver's motions, he went rapidly to where the blue flame arose. It must have been very faint, for it did not seem to illumine the place around it at all, and, gathering a few stones, formed them into some device.
Once there appeared a strange optical effect. When he stood between me and the flame, he did not obstruct it, for I could see its ghostly flicker all the same. This startled me, but as the effect was only momentary, I took it that my eyes deceived me, straining through the darkness.
Then for a time there were no blue flames, and we sped onwards through the gloom, with the howling of the wolves around us, as though they were following in a moving circle.
At last there came a time when the driver went further afield than he had yet gone, and during his absence the horses began to tremble worse than ever, and to snort and scream with fright. I could not see any cause for it, for the howling of the wolves had ceased altogether.
But just then the moon, sailing through the black clouds, appeared behind the jagged crest of a beetling pine-clad rock, and by its light I saw around us a ring of wolves, with white teeth and lolling red tongues, with long sinewy limbs and shaggy hair.
They were a hundred times more terrible in the grim silence which held them than even when they howled. For myself I felt a sort of paralysis of fear. It is only when a man feels himself face to face with such horrors that he can understand their true import.
All at once the wolves began to howl as though the moonlight had had some peculiar effect on them. The horses jumped about and reared, and looked helplessly round with eyes that rolled in a way painful to see. But the living ring of terror encompassed them on every side, and they had perforced to remain within it.
I called to the coachman to come, for it seemed to me that our only chance was to try to break out through the ring, and to aid his approach I shouted and beat the side of the kalesh, hoping by the noise to scare the wolves from the side so as to give him a chance of reaching the trap.
How he came there I know not, but I heard his voice raised in a tone of imperious command, and, looking towards the sound, saw him stand in the roadway.
As he swept his long arms, as though brushing aside some impalpable obstacle, the wolves fell back, and back further still. Just then a heavy cloud passed across the face of the moon, so that we were again in darkness.
When I could see again, the driver was climbing into the kalesh, and the wolves disappeared. This was all so strange and uncanny that a dreadful fear came upon me, and I was afraid to speak or move. The time seemed interminable as we swept on our way, now in almost complete darkness, for the rolling clouds obscured the moon.
We kept on ascending, with occasional periods of quick descent, but in the main always ascending. Suddenly I became conscious of the fact that the driver was in the act of pulling up the horses in the courtyard of a vast ruined castle, from whose tall black windows came no ray of light, and whose broken battlements showed a jagged line against the sky.
Recorded on November 2nd, 2005, in Oceanside, California.
Jonathan Harker's Journal Continued.
Fifth of May. I must have been asleep, for certainly if I had been fully awake I must
have noticed the approach of such a remarkable place. In the gloom the courtyard looked of
considerable size, and as several dark ways led from it under great round arches,
it perhaps seemed bigger than it really is. I have not yet been able to see it by daylight.
When the collage stopped the driver jumped down and held out his hand to assist me to a light.
Again I could not but notice his prodigious strength. His hand actually seemed like a steel
vice that could have crushed mine if he had chosen. Then he took my traps and placed them
on the ground beside me as I stood close to a great door, old and studded with large iron nails,
and set in a projecting doorway of massive stone. I could see even in the dim light that
the stone was massively carved, but that the carving had been much worn by time and weather.
As I stood the driver jumped again into his seat and shook the reins.
The horses started forward, and Trapindal disappeared down one of the dark openings.
I stood in silence where I was, for I did not know what to do.
Of bell or knocker there was no sign. Through these frowning walls and dark window openings
it was not likely that my voice could penetrate. The time I waited seemed endless,
and I felt doubts and fears crowding upon me. What sort of place had I come to, and among what kind
of people? What sort of grim adventure was it on which I had embarked? Was this a customary
incident in the life of a solicitor's clerk, sent out to explain the purchase of a London estate
to a foreigner? Ha, solicitor's clerk! Mina would not like that. Solicitor! For just before leaving
London I got word that my examination was successful, and I am now a full-blown solicitor.
I began to rub my eyes and pinch myself to see if I were awake. It all seemed like a horrible
nightmare to me, and I expected that I should suddenly awake and find myself at home, with the
lawns struggling in through the windows, as I had now and again felt in the morning after a day of
overwork. But my flesh answered the pinching test, and my eyes were not to be deceived. I was indeed
awake and among the Carpathians. All I could do now was to be patient and to wait the coming of
morning. Just as I had come to this conclusion I heard a heavy step approaching behind the great
door, and I saw through the chinks the gleam of a coming light. Then there was the sound of rattling
chains and the clanking of massive bolts drawn back. A key was turned with the loud grating noise
of long disuse, and the great door swung back. Within stood a tall old man, clean shaven,
save for a long white moustache, and clad in black from head to foot without a single speck
of colour about him anywhere. He held in his hand an antique silver lamp, in which the flame
burned without a chimney or globe of any kind, throwing long quivering shadows as it flickered
in the draught of the open door. The old man motioned me in with his right hand with a courtly
gesture, saying in excellent English, but with a strange intonation,
Welcome to my house. Enter freely, and of your own free will. He made no motion of stepping to
meet me, but stood like a statue, as though his gesture of welcome had fixed him into stone.
The instant, however, that I had stepped over the threshold, he moved impulsively forward,
and holding out his hand, grasped mine with a strength which made me wince, an effect which
was not lessened by the fact that it seemed cold as ice, more like the hand of a dead than a living
man. Again he said, Welcome to my house. Enter freely, go safely, and leave something of the
much akin to what I had noticed in the driver, whose face I had not seen, that for a moment I
doubted if it were not the same person to whom I was speaking. So to make sure, I said interrogatively,
Count Dracula? He bowed in a courtly way as he replied, I am Dracula, and I bid you welcome,
Mr. Harker, to my house. Come in, the night air is chill, and you must need to eat and rest.
As he was speaking, he put the lamp on a bracket on the wall, and stepping out, took my luggage.
He had carried it in before I could forestall him. I protested, but he insisted,
Nay, sir, you are my guest. It is late, and my people are not available. Let me see to your
comfort myself. He insisted on carrying my traps along the passage, and then up a great winding
stair, and along another great passage, on whose stone floor our steps rang heavily.
At the end of this, he threw open a heavy door, and I rejoiced to see within a well-lit room in
which a table was spread for supper, and on whose mighty hearth a great fire of logs,
freshly replenished, flamed and flared. The Count halted, putting down my bags, closed the door,
and crossing the room, opened another door, which led into a small octagonal room, lit by a single
lamp, and seemingly without a window of any sort. Passing through this, he opened another door,
and motioned me to enter. It was a welcome sight, for here was a great bedroom well lighted and
warmed by another log fire also added to it lately, for the top logs were fresh,
which sent a hollow roar up the wide chimney. The Count himself left my luggage inside,
and withdrew, saying, before he closed the door, You will need, after your journey,
to refresh yourself by making your toilette. I trust you will find all you wish.
When you are ready, come into the other room, where you will find your supper prepared.
The light and warmth of the Count's courteous welcome seemed to have dissipated all my doubts
and fears. Having then reached my normal state, I discovered that I was half famished with hunger,
so, making a hasty toilette, I went into the other room. I found supper already laid out.
My host, who stood on one side of the great fireplace, leaning against the stonework,
made a graceful wave of his hand toward the table, and said,
I pray you, be seated, and sup how you please. You will I trust.
Excuse me that I do not join you, but I have dined already, and I do not sup.
I handed to him the sealed letter which Mr. Hawkins had entrusted to me.
He opened it, and read it gravely. Then, with a charming smile, he handed it to me to read.
One passage, if it at least, gave me a thrill of pleasure.
I must regret that an attack of gout from which malady I am a constant sufferer
forbids absolutely any travelling on my part for some time to come.
But I am happy to say I can send a sufficient substitute,
one in whom I have every possible confidence. He is a young man, full of energy and talent
in his own way, and of a very faithful disposition. He is discreet and silent,
and has grown into manhood in my service. He shall be ready to attend on you when you
will, during his stay, and shall take your instructions in all matters.
The Count himself came forward, and took off the cover of a dish,
and I felt who at once on an excellent roast chicken. This, with some cheese,
and a salad, and a bottle of old tokay, of which I had two glasses, was my supper.
During the time I was eating it, the Count asked me many questions as to my journey,
and I told him by degrees all I had experienced. By this time I had finished my supper,
and by my host's desire had drawn up a chair by the fire, and begun to smoke a cigar which he
offered me, at the same time excusing himself that he did not smoke. I had now an opportunity
of observing him, and found him of a very marked physiognomy. His face was a strong,
a very strong aquiline, with high bridge of the thin nose, and peculiarly arched nostrils,
and with lofty domed forehead, and hair growing scantily round the temples, but profusely elsewhere.
His eyebrows were very massive, almost meeting over the nose, and with bushy hair that seemed
to curl in its own profusion. The mouth, so far as I could see it under the heavy mustache,
was fixed and rather cruel looking, with peculiarly sharp white teeth. These protruded over the lips,
whose remarkable ruddiness showed astonishing vitality in a man of his years. For the rest,
his ears were pale, and at the tops extremely pointed. The chin was broad and strong, and the
cheeks firm though thin. The general effect was one of extraordinary pallor. Hitherto I had noticed
the backs of his hands as they lay on his knees in the firelight, and they had seemed rather white
and fine. But seeing them now close to me I could not but notice that they were rather coarse, broad
with squat fingers. Strange to say they were hairs in the centre of the palm. The nails were long and
fine, and cut to a sharp point. As the count leaned over me, and his hands touched me, I could
repress a shudder. It may have been that his breath was rank, but a horrible feeling of nausea came
over me, which, do what I would, I could not conceal. The count evidently noticing it drew back,
and with a grim sort of smile, which showed more than he had yet done of his protuberant teeth,
sat himself down again on his own side of the fireplace. We were both silent for a while,
and as I looked towards the window I saw the first dim streak of the coming dawn.
There seemed a strange stillness over everything, but as I listened I heard as if from down below
in the valley the howling of many wolves. The count's eyes gleamed, and he said,
Listen to them, the children of the night, what music they make.
Seeing, I suppose, some expression in my face, strange to him, he added,
Ah sir, you dwellers in the city cannot enter into the feelings of the hunter.
Then he rose and said, But you must be tired. Your bedroom is all ready,
and tomorrow you shall sleep as late as you will. I have to be away till the afternoon,
so sleep well and dream well. With a courteous bow he opened for me himself the door of the
octagonal room, and I entered my bedroom. I am all in a sea of wonders. I doubt. I fear.
I think strange things which I dare not confess to my own soul.
God keep me, if only for the sake of those dear to me.
7th of May. It is again early morning, but I have rested and enjoyed the last twenty-four hours.
I slept till late in the day, and awoke of my own accord. When I had dressed myself,
I went into the room where we had supped, and found a cold breakfast laid out,
with coffee kept hot by the pot being placed on the hearth. There was a card on the table,
on which was written, I have to be absent for a while. Do not wait for me. D.
I set to and enjoyed a hearty meal. When I had done I looked for a bell,
so that I might let the servants know I had finished, but I could not find one.
There are certainly odd deficiencies in the house, considering the extraordinary evidences
of wealth which are round me. The table services of gold and so beautifully wrought that it must be
of immense value. The curtains and upholstery of the chairs and sofas and the hangings of my bed
are of the costliest and most beautiful fabrics, and must have been of fabulous value when they
were made, for they are centuries old, though in excellent order. I saw something like them
in Hampton Court, but they were worn and frayed in Malthedon. But still in none of the rooms is
there a mirror. There is not even a toilette glass on my table, and I had to get the little
glass from my bag before I could either shave or brush my hair. I have not yet seen a servant
anywhere, or heard a sound near the castle, except the howling of wolves.
Some time after I had finished my meal, I did not know whether to call it breakfast or dinner,
for it was between five and six o'clock when I had it. I looked about for something to read,
for I did not like to go about the castle until I had asked the Count's permission.
There was absolutely nothing in the room, book, newspaper, or even writing materials,
so I opened another door in the room and found a sort of library.
The door opposite mine I tried, but found locked. In the library, I found to my great delight a
vast number of English books, whole shelves full of them, and bound volumes of magazines and
newspapers. A table in the centre was littered with English magazines and newspapers, though
none of them were of very recent date. The books were of the most varied kind. History,
geography, politics, political economy, botany, geology, law, all relating to England and the
English life and customs and manners. There were even books of reference, such as the London
Directory, the Red and Blue Books, Switikas Almanac, the Army and Navy Lists, and it somehow
gladdened by heart to see it, the Law List. Whilst I was looking at the books, the door opened and
Count entered. He saluted me in a hearty way and hoped that I had had a good night's rest.
Then he went on.
the crowded streets of your mighty London, to be in the midst of the whirl and rush of humanity,
to share its life, its change, its death, and all that makes it what it is. But alas, as yet I only
know your tongue through books. To you, my friend, I look that I know it to speak.
But Count, I said, you know and speak English thoroughly. He bowed gravely.
I thank you, my friend, for your all too flattering estimate, but yet I fear I am but
a little way on the road I would travel. True, I know the grammar and the words,
but yet I know not how to speak them. Indeed, I said, you speak excellently.
Not so, he answered. Well, I know that. Did I move and speak in your London?
None there are who would not know me for a stranger. That is not enough for me.
Here I am noble. I am a boyar. The common people know me, and I am master. But a stranger in a
not, and to know not is to care not for. I am content if I am like the rest, so that no man
stops if he sees me, or pauses in his speaking if he hears my words. Ha, ha, stranger. I have been
so long, master, that I would be master still, or at least that none other should be master of me.
You come to me not alone as agent of my friend Peter Hawkins of Exeter, to tell me all about
my new estate in London. You, shall I trust, rest here with me a while, so that by our talking I may
learn the English in donation, and I would that you tell me when I make error even of the smallest
in my speaking. I am sorry that I had to be away so long to-day, but you will, I know, forgive one
who has so many important affairs in hand. Of course I said all I could about being willing,
and asked if I might come into that room when I chose. He answered, yes, certainly, and added,
you may go anywhere you wish in the castle, except where the doors are locked where, of course,
you will not wish to go. There is reason that all things are as they are, and did you see with my
eyes, and know with my knowledge, you would perhaps better understand. I said I was sure of this,
and then he went on. We are in Transylvania, and Transylvania is not England. Our ways are
not your ways, and there shall be to you many strange things. Nay, from what you have told me
of your experiences already you know something of what strange things there may be. This led
to much conversation, and as it was evident that he wanted to talk, if only for talking's sake,
I asked him many questions regarding things that had already happened to me or come within my notice.
Sometimes he sheered off the subject, or turned the conversation by pretending not to understand,
but generally he answered all I asked most frankly. Then, as time went on, and I had got somewhat
bolder, I asked him of some of the strange things of the preceding night, as, for instance, why the
places where he had seen the blue flames. He then explained to me that it was commonly believed
that on a certain night of the year, last night in fact, when all evil spirits are supposed to have
unchecked sway, a blue flame is seen over any place where treasure has been concealed.
That treasure has been hidden, he went on. In the region through which you came last night,
there can be but little doubt, for it was the ground fought over for centuries by the Wallachian,
the Saxon, and the Turk. Why, there is hardly a foot of soil in all this region that has not
been enriched by the blood of men, patriots, or invaders. In the old days there were stirring
times when the Austrians and the Hungarians came up in hordes, and the patriots went out to meet
them, men and women, the aged and children too, and waited their coming on the rocks above the
passes that they might sweep destruction on them with their artificial avalanches.
When the invader was triumphant, he found but a little, for whatever there was had been sheltered
in the friendly soil. But how, said I, can it have remained so long undiscovered,
when there is a sure index to it if men will but take the trouble to look?
The Count smiled, and as his lips ran back over the gums, the long sharp canine teeth
showed out strangely. He answered, Because your peasant is at heart a coward and a fool.
Those flames only appear on one night, and on that night no man of this land willed if he can
help it stir without his doors. And, dear sir, even if he did, he would not know what to do.
Why, even the peasant that you tell me of, who marked the place of the flame,
would not know where to look in daylight even for his own work.
Even you would not, I dare be sworn, be able to find these places again.
There you are right, I said. I know no more than the dead were even to look for them.
Then we drifted on to other matters.
Come, he said at last, tell me of London, and of the house which you have procured for me.
With an apology for my remissness, I went into my own room to get the papers from my bag.
Whilst I was placing them in order, I heard a rattling of china and silver in the next room,
and as I passed through, noticed that the table had been cleared and the lamp lit,
for it was by this time deep into the dark.
The lamps were also lit in the study or library,
and I found the Count lying on the sofa reading, of all things in the world,
an English Bradshaw's guide. When I came in, he cleared the books and papers from the table,
and with him I went into plans and deeds and figures of all sorts. He was interested in
everything, and asked me a myriad questions about the place and its surroundings.
He clearly had studied beforehand all he could get on the subject of the neighborhood,
for he evidently at the end knew very much more than I did. When I remarked this, he answered,
Well, but my friend, is it not needful that I should? When I go there, I shall be all alone,
and my friend Harker Jonathan, nay, pardon me, I fall into my country's habit of putting your
patronymic first, my friend Jonathan Harker, will not be by my side to correct and aid me.
He will be an exeter miles away, probably working at papers of the law with my other friend Peter
Hawkins, soul. We went thoroughly into the business of the purchase of the estate at
Perfleet. When I had told him the facts, and got his signature to the necessary papers,
and had written a letter with them ready to post to Mr. Hawkins, he began to ask me how I had come
across so suitable a place. I read to him the notes which I had made at the time, and which
I inscribe here. At Perfleet, on a by-road, I came across just such a place as seemed to be required,
and where there was displayed a dilapidated notice that the place was for sale.
It was surrounded by a high wall of ancient structure, built of heavy stones, and has not
been repaired for a large number of years. The closed gates are of heavy old oak and iron,
all eaten with rust. The estate is called Carfax, no doubt a corruption of the old Cartreface,
as the house is four-sided, agreeing with the cardinal points of the compass.
It contains in all some twenty acres, quite surrounded by the solid stone wall above mentioned.
There are many trees on it which make it in places gloomy, and there is a deep, dark-looking pond,
a small lake, evidently fed by some springs, as the water is clear and flows away in a fair-sized
stream. The house is very large, and of all periods back, I should say to medieval times,
for one part is of stone immensely thick, with only a few windows high up and heavily barred
with iron. It looks like part of a keep, and is close to an old chapel or church.
I could not enter it, as I had not the key of the door leading to it from the house,
but I have taken with my Kodak views of it from various points.
The house had been added to, but in a very straggling way, and I can only guess at the
amount of ground it covers, which must be very great. There are but few houses close at hand,
one being a very large house only recently added to and formed into a private lunatic asylum.
It is not, however, visible from the grounds.
When I had finished, he said,
I am glad that it is old and big. I myself am of an old family, and to live in a new house would
kill me. A house cannot be made habitable in a day, and after all how few days go to make up a
century. I rejoice also that there is a chapel of old times. We Transylvanian nobles love not to
think that our bones may lie amongst the common dead. I seek not gaiety nor mirth, not the bright
voluptuousness of much sunshine and sparkling waters which please the young and gay. I am no
longer young, and my heart, through weary years of mourning over the dead, is attuned to mirth.
Moreover, the walls of my castle are broken, the shadows are many, and the wind breathes cold
through the broken battlements and casements. I love the shade and the shadow, and would be alone
with my thoughts when I may. Somehow his words and his look did not seem to accord, or else it
the cast of his face made his smile look malignant and satanine. Presently with an excuse he left me,
asking me to pull my papers together. He was some little time away, and I began to look at
some of the books around me. One was an atlas which I found open naturally to England, as if
that map had been much used. On looking at it, I found in certain places little rings marked,
and on examining these, I noticed that one was near London on the east side,
manifestly where his new estate was situated. The other two were at Exeter, and would be on
the Yorkshire coast. It was the better part of an hour when the Count returned.
Aha! he said. Still at your books? Good. But you must not work always. Come, I am informed
that your supper is ready. He took my arm, and we went into the next room, where I found an
excellent supper ready on the table. The Count again excused himself, as he had dined out on
his being away from home. But he sat as on the previous night, and chatted whilst I ate. After
supper I smoked as on the last evening, and the Count stayed with me, chatting and asking questions
on every conceivable subject, hour after hour. I felt that it was getting very late indeed,
but I did not say anything, for I felt under obligation to meet my host's wishes in every way.
I was not sleepy, as the long sleep yesterday had fortified me, but I could not help experiencing
that chill which comes over one at the coming of the dawn, which is like, in its way, the turn of
the tide. They say that people who are near death die generally at the change to dawn,
or at the turn of the tide. Anyone who has when tired, and tied as it were to his post,
experienced this change in the atmosphere, I can well believe it.
All at once we heard the crow of the cock coming up with preternatural
shrillness through the clear morning air. Count Dracula, jumping to his feet, said,
Why, there is the morning again! How remiss I am to let you stay up so long! You must make
your conversation regarding my dear new country of England less interesting, so that I may not
forget how time flies by us. And with a courtly bow he quickly left me.
I went into my room and drew the curtains, but there was little to notice.
My window opened into the courtyard, all I could see was the warm grey of the quickening sky,
so I pulled the curtains again, and have written of this day.
8th of May. I began to fear as I wrote in this book that I was getting to diffuse,
but now I am glad that I went into detail from the first, for there is something so strange about
this place and all in it that I cannot but feel uneasy. I wish I was safe out of it,
or that I had never come. It may be that this strange night existence is telling on me,
but would that that were all. If there were anyone to talk to I could bear it, but there is no one.
I have only the Count to speak with, and he—I fear I am myself the only living soul within the
place. Let me be prosaic so far as facts can be. It will help me to bear up, and imagination must
not run riot with me. If it does, I am lost. Let me say at once how I stand, or seem to.
I only slept a few hours when I went to bed, and feeling that I could not sleep any more got up.
I had hung my shaving-glass by the window, and was just beginning to shave.
Suddenly I felt a hand on my shoulder, and heard the Count's voice saying to me,
Good morning. I started, for it amazed me that I had not seen him since the reflection of
the glass covered the whole room behind me. In starting I had cut myself slightly,
but did not notice it at the moment. Having answered the Count's salutation,
I turned to the glass again to see how I had been mistaken. This time there could be no error,
for the man was close to me, and I could see him over my shoulder, but there was no reflection of
him in the mirror. The whole room behind me was displayed, but there was no sign of a man in it,
except myself. This was startling, and coming on top of so many strange things was beginning
to increase that vague feeling of uneasiness which I always have when the Count is near.
But at the instant I saw that the cut had bled a little, and the blood was trickling over my chin,
I laid down the razor, turning as I did so half round to look for some sticking plaster.
When the Count saw my face, his eyes blazed with a sort of demoniac fury,
and he suddenly made a grab at my throat. I drew away, and his hand touched the string of beads
which held the crucifix. It made an instant change in him, for the fury passed so quickly
that I could hardly believe that it was ever there. Take care, he said. Take care how you cut
yourself. It is more dangerous than you think in this country. Then, seizing the shaving glass,
he went on, and this is the wretched thing that has done the mischief. It is a foul
barbel of man's vanity. Away with it! And opening the window with one wrench of his terrible hand,
he flung out the glass, which was shattered into a thousand pieces on the stones of the
I did not see how I am to shave, unless in my watch case or the bottom of the shaving pot,
which is fortunately of metal. When I went into the dining room, breakfast was prepared,
but I could not find the Count anywhere, so I breakfasted alone. It is strange that as yet
I have not seen the Count eat or drink. He must be a very peculiar man. After breakfast,
I did a little exploring in the castle. I went out on the stairs, and found a room looking
towards the south. The view was magnificent, and from where I stood there was every opportunity
of seeing it. The castle is on the very edge of a terrific precipice. A stone falling from the
window would fall a thousand feet without touching anything. As far as the eye can reach is a sea of
green tree tops, with occasionally a deep rift where there is a chasm. Here and there are silver
threads where the rivers wind in deep gorges through the forests. But I am not in heart to
beauty, for when I had seen the view I explored further. Doors, doors, doors everywhere,
and all locked and bolted. In no place save from the windows and the castle walls is there an
available exit. The castle is a veritable prison, and I am a prisoner.
III Jonathan Harker's Journal Continued
When I found that I was a prisoner, a sort of wild feeling came over me. I rushed up and down
the stairs, trying every door and peering out of every window I could find. But after a little,
the conviction of my helplessness overpowered all other feelings. When I look back, after a
few hours, I think I must have been mad for the time, for I behaved much as a rat does in a trap.
When, however, the conviction had come to me that I was helpless, I sat down quietly,
as quietly as I have ever done anything in my life, and began to think over what was best to
be done. I am thinking still, and as yet have come to no definite conclusion. Of one thing only am I
that it is no use making my ideas known to the count. He knows well that I am imprisoned,
and as he has done it himself, and has doubtless his own motives for it, he would only deceive me
if I trusted him fully with the facts. So far as I can see, my only plan will be to keep my
knowledge and my fears to myself, and my eyes open. I am, I know, either being deceived,
like a baby, by my own fears, or else I am in desperate straits, and if the latter be so,
I need, and shall need, all my brains to get through. I had hardly come to this conclusion
when I heard the great door below shut, and knew that the Count had returned. He did not
come at once into the library, so I went cautiously to my own room and found him making the bed.
This was odd, but only confirmed what I had all along thought, that there are no servants
in the house. When later I saw him through the chink of the hinges of the door laying
the table in the dining-room, I was assured of it. For if he does himself all these menial
offices, surely it is proof that there is no one else in the castle. It must have been
the Count himself who was the driver of the coach that brought me here. This is a terrible
thought. For if so, what does it mean that he could control the wolves as he did, by
only holding up his hand for silence? How was it that all the people at Bistritz and
on the coach had some terrible fear for me? What meant the giving of the crucifix, of
the garlic, of the wild rose, of the mountain ash? Bless that good, good woman who hung
the crucifix round my neck! For it is a comfort and a strength to me whenever I touch it.
It is odd that a thing which I have been taught to regard with disfavour and as idolatrous
should in a time of loneliness and trouble be of help. Is it that there is something
in the essence of the thing itself, or that it is a medium, a tangible help, in conveying
memories of sympathy and comfort? Sometime, if it may be, I must examine this matter and
try to make up my mind about it. In the meantime I must find out all I can about Count Dracula,
as it may help me to understand. Tonight he may talk of himself, if I turn the conversation
that way. I must be very careful, however, not to awake his suspicion.
Midnight.
I've had a long talk with the Count. I asked him a few questions on Transylvania history,
and he warmed up to the subject wonderfully. In his speaking of things and people, and
especially of battles, he spoke as if he had been present at them all. This he afterwards
explained by saying that to a boyar the pride of his house and name is his own pride, that
their glory is his glory, that their fate is his fate. Whenever he spoke of his house
he always said we, and spoke almost in the plural, like a king speaking. I wish I could
put down all he said exactly as he said it, for to me it was most fascinating. It seemed
to have in it a whole history of the country. He grew excited as he spoke, and walked about
the room pulling his great white moustache, and grasping anything on which he laid his
hands as though he would crush it by main strength. One thing he said, which I shall
put down as nearly as I can, for it tells in its way the story of his race.
These Achilles have a right to be proud, for in our reigns flows the blood of many brave
races who fought as the lion fights for lordship. Here, in the whirlpool of European races, the
thunder and thunder gave them, which their berserkers displayed to such foul intent on
the seaboard of Europe, and of Asia and Africa too, till the peoples thought that the wervels
themselves had come. Here too, when they came, they found Sahans, whose warlike fury had
swept the earth like a living flame, till the dying peoples held it in their veins,
and the blood of those old witches who expelled from Scythia had mated with the devils in
the desert. Fools! Fools! What devil or what witch was ever so great as Attila, whose blood
is in these veins? He held up his arms. Is it a wonder that we were a conquering race?
That we were proud that when the Magyar, the Lombard, the Avvar, the Bolgar, or the Turk
poured his thousands on our frontiers that we drove them back? Is it strange that when
our path and his legions swept through the Hungarian fatherland, he found us here when
he reached the frontier, that the Honfoglalaz was completed there, and when the Hungarian
flood swept eastward, the Zekales were claimed as kindred by the victorious Magyars, and
who us for centuries was trusted to guarding of the frontier of Turkiland? Ay, and more
than that, endless duty of the frontier guard, for as the Turks say, water sleeps and the
enemy is sleepless. Who more gladly than we throughout the four nations received the bloody
sword, or at its warlike call flocked quicker to the standard of the king? When was redeemed
that great shame of my nation, the shame of Kosova, when the flags of the Valach and the
Magyar went down beneath the crescent? Who was it but one of my own race who as Voivode
crossed the Danube and beat the Turk on his own ground? This was a Dracula, indeed. Who
was it that his own unworthy brother, when he had fallen, sold his people to the Turk
and brought the shame of slavery on them? Was it not this Dracula, indeed, who inspired
that other of his race, who in a later age again and again brought his forces over the
great river into Turkiland, who when he was beaten back, came again and again, though
he had to come alone from the bloody field where his troops were being slaughtered, since
he knew that he alone could ultimately triumph? They said that he thought only of his own
self. Bah! What good are peasants without a leader? Where ends the war without a brain
and a heart to conduct it? Again, when after the battle of Mohaks they threw off the Hungarian
yoke, we of the Dracula blood were amongst their leaders, for our spirit would not brook
that we were not free. Ah, young sir, the Zechelis and the Dracula as their heart's
blood, their brains and their swords, can boast a record that mushroom growths like
the Habsburgs and the Romanovs could never reach. The warlike days are over. Blood is
too precious a thing in these days of dishonorable peace, and the glories of the great race,
the vices, are as a tale that is told.
It was by this time close on morning, and we went to bed. Memorandum. This diary seems
horribly like the beginning of the Arabian Nights, for everything has to break off at
cock-crow or like the ghost of Hamlet's father.
12th of May. Let me begin with facts. Bare, meager facts, verified by books and figures,
and of which there can be no doubt. I must not confuse them with experiences which will
have to rest on my own observation or my memory of them. Last evening, when the Count came
from his room, he began by asking me questions on legal matters and on the doings of certain
kinds of business. I had spent the day wearily over books, and, simply to keep my mind occupied,
went over some of the matters I had been examined in at Lincoln's Inn. There was a certain method
in the Count's inquiries, so I shall try to put them down in sequence. The knowledge may
somehow, or some time, be useful to me.
First, he asked if a man in England might have two solicitors or more. I told him he
might have a dozen if he wished, but that it would not be wise to have more than one
solicitor engaged in one transaction, as only one could act at a time, and that the change
would be certain to militate against his interest. He seemed thoroughly to understand, and went
on to ask if there would be any practical difficulty in having one man to attend, say,
to banking, and another to look after shipping, in case local help were needed in a place
far from home of the banking solicitor. I asked him to explain more fully, so that I
might not by any chance mislead him. So he said,
I shall illustrate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, from under the shadow of
your beautiful cathedral at Exeter, which is far from London, buys for me through your
good self my place at London. Now here let me say frankly, lest you should think it strange
that I have sought the services of one so far off from London instead of some one resident
there, that my motive was that no local interest might be served save my wish only, and as
one of London residents might perhaps have some purpose of himself or friend to serve.
I went thus afield to seek my agent, whose labor should be only to my interest.
Now suppose I, who have much of affairs, wish to ship goods, say, to Newcastle or Durham
or Harwich or Dover. Might it not be that it could be with more ease be done by consigning
to one in these ports? I answered that certainly it would be most easy, but that we solicitors
had a system of agency, one for the other, so that local work could be done locally on
instruction from any solicitor, so that the client simply by placing himself in the hands
of one man could have his wishes carried out by him without further trouble.
But, said he, I could be at liberty to direct myself. Is it not so?
Of course, I replied, and such is often done by men of business, who do not like the whole
of their affairs to be known by any one person.
Good, he said, and then went on to ask about the means of making consignments and the forms
to be gone through, and of all sorts of difficulties which might arise, but by forethought could
be guarded against. I explained all these things to him to the best of my ability, and
he certainly left me under the impression that he would have made a wonderful solicitor.
For there was nothing that he did not think of or foresee. For a man who was never in
the country, and who did not evidently do much in the way of business, his knowledge
and acumen were wonderful. When he had satisfied himself on these points
on which he had spoken, and I had verified all as well as I could by the books available,
he suddenly stood up and said,
Have you written since your first letter to our friend Mr. Peter Hawkins, or to any other?
It was with some bitterness in my heart that I answered that I had not, that as yet I had
not seen any opportunity of sending letters to anybody.
Then right now, my young friend, he said, laying a heavy hand on my shoulder, write
to our friend, and to any other, and say, if it will please you, that you shall stay
with me until a month from now.
Do you wish me to stay so long? I asked, for my heart grew cold at the thought.
I desire it much. Nay, I will take no refusal.
When your master, employer, what you will, engaged that someone should come on his behalf,
it was understood that my needs only were to be consulted.
I have not stinted. Is it not so?
What could I do but bow acceptance? It was Mr. Hawkins' interest, not mine, and I had
to think of him not myself and besides, while Count Dracula was speaking. There was that
in his eyes and in his bearing, which made me remember that I was a prisoner, and that
if I wished it, I could have no choice.
The Count saw his victory in my bow, and his mastery in the trouble of my face, for he
began at once to use them, but in his own smooth, resistless way.
I pray you, my good young friend, that you will not discourse of things other than business
in your letters. It will doubtless please your friends to know that you are well and
that you look forward to getting home to them. Is it not so? As he spoke, he handed me three
sheets of notepaper and three envelopes. They were all the thinnest foreign post, and looking
at them, then at him, and noticing his quiet smile with the sharp canine teeth lying over
the red underlip, I understood as well as if he had spoken that I should be more careful
what I wrote, for he would be able to read it.
So I determined to write only formal notes now, but to write fully to Mr. Hawkins in
secret, and also to Mina, for to her I could write shorthand which would puzzle the Count,
if he did see it. When I had written my two letters I sat quiet, reading a book, whilst
the Count wrote several notes, referring, as he wrote them, to some books on his table.
Then he took up my two and placed them with his own, and put by his writing materials,
after which, the instant the door had closed behind him, I leaned over and looked at the
letters, which were face down on the table. I felt no compunction in doing so, for under
the circumstances I felt that I should protect myself in every way I could.
One of the letters was directed to Samuel F. Billington, No. 7, the Crescent, Whitby.
Another to Herr Lütner, Varna. The third was to Coots & Company, London, and the fourth
to Herren Klopstock & Bilruth, Bankers, Budapest. The second and fourth were unsealed. I was
having just had time to resume my book before the Count, holding still another letter in
his hand, entered the room. He took up the letters on the table and stamped them carefully,
and then turning to me, said,
I trust you will forgive me, but I have much work to do in private this evening. You will,
I hope, find all things as you wish.
At the door he turned, and after a moment's pause said,
Let me advise you, my dear young friend, Nay, let me warn you, with all seriousness, that
should you leave these rooms, you will not by any chance go to sleep in any other part
of the castle. It is old and has many memories, and there are bad dreams for those who sleep
unwisely. Be warned. Should sleep now or ever overcome you, or be like to do, then haste
to your own chamber or to these rooms, for your rest will then be safe. But if you be
not careful in this respect, then...
He finished his speech in a gruesome way, for he motioned with his hands as if he were
washing them. I quite understood. My only doubt was as to whether any dream could be
more terrible than the unnaturable, horrible net of gloom and mystery which seemed closing
around me.
Later, I endorsed the last words written, but this time there is no doubt in question.
I shall not fear to sleep in any place where he is not. I have placed the crucifix over
the head of my bed. I imagine that my rest is thus freer from dreams, and there it shall
remain.
When he left me I went to my room. After a little while, not hearing any sound, I came
out and went up the stone stair to where I could look out towards the south. There was
some sense of freedom in the vast expanse. Inaccessible though it was to me, as compared
with the narrow darkness of the courtyard.
Looking out on this, I felt that I was indeed in prison, and I seemed to want a breath of
fresh air, though it were of the night. I am beginning to feel this nocturnal existence
tell on me. It is destroying my nerve. I start at my own shadow and am full of all sorts
of horrible imaginings. God knows that there is ground for my terrible fear in this accursed
place.
I looked out over the beautiful expanse, bathed in soft yellow moonlight till it was almost
as light as day. In the soft light the distant hills became melted, and the shadows in the
valleys and gorges of velvety blackness. The mere beauty seemed to cheer me. There was
peace and comfort in every breath I drew.
As I leaned from the window my eye was caught by something moving a story below me and somewhat
to my left, where I imagined, from the order of the rooms, that the windows of the Count's
Stone Room would look out. The window at which I stood was tall and deep, stone mullioned,
and though weather-worn was still complete. But it was evidently many a day since the
case had been there. I drew back behind the stonework and looked carefully out. What I
knew the man by the neck and the movement of his back and arms. In any case I could
not mistake the hands which I had some many opportunities of studying. I was at first
interested and somewhat amused, or it is wonderful how small a matter will interest and amuse
a man when he is a prisoner. But my very feelings changed to repulsion and terror. I was not
when I saw the whole man slowly emerge from the window and begin to crawl down the castle
wall over the dreadful abyss, face down with his cloak spreading out around him like great
wings. At first I could not believe my eyes. I thought it was some trick of the moonlight,
and some weird effect of shadow. But I kept looking, and it could be no delusion. I saw
the fingers and toes grasp the corners of the stones, worn clear of the mortar by the
stress of years, and by thus using every projection and inequality move downwards with considerable
speed, just as a lizard moves along a wall. What manner of man is this, or what manner
of creature is it in the semblance of man? I feel the dread of this horrible place overpowering
me. I am in fear, in awful fear, and there is no escape for me.
I am encompassed about with terrors that I dare not think of.
Once more I have seen the Count go out in his lizard fashion. He moved downwards in
a side-long way, some hundred feet down and a good deal to the left. He vanished into
some hole or window. When his head had disappeared I leaned out to try and see more but without
a veil. The distance was too great to allow a proper angle of sight. I knew he had left
the castle now, and thought to use the opportunity to explore more than I had dared to do as
yet. I went back to the room, and taking a lamp, tried all the doors. They were all locked,
as I had expected, and the locks were comparatively new. But I went down the stone stairs to the
hall where I had entered originally. I found I could pull back the bolts easily enough
and unhook the great chains. But the door was locked, and the key was gone. That key
must be in the Count's room. I must watch, should his door be unlocked, so that I may
get it and escape. I went on to make a thorough examination of the various stairs and passages,
and to try the doors that opened from them. One or two small rooms near the hall were
open, but there was nothing to see in them except old furniture, dusty with age and moth-eaten.
At last, however, I found one door at the top of the stairway which, though it seemed
locked, gave a little under pressure. I tried it harder, and found that it was not really
locked, but that the resistance came from the fact that the hinges had fallen somewhat,
and the heavy door rested on the floor. Here was an opportunity which I might not have
again, so I exerted myself, and with many efforts forced it back so that I could enter.
I was now on a wing of the castle, further to the right than the rooms I knew, and a
story lower down. From the windows I could see that the suite of rooms lay along to the
south of the castle, the windows of the end-room looking out both west and south.
On the latter side, as well as to the former, there was a great precipice. The castle was
built on the corner of a great rock, so that on three sides it was quite impregnable. And
great windows were placed here, where sling or bow or culverine could not reach, and consequently
light and comfort, impossible to a position which had to be guarded, were secured. To
the west was a great valley, and then rising far away great jagged mountain fastnesses
rising peak on peak, the sheer rock studded with mountain ash and thorn, whose roots clung
in cracks and crevices and crannies of the stone. This was evidently the portion of the
castle occupied by the ladies in bygone days, for the furniture had more an air of comfort
than any I had seen. The windows were curtainless, and the yellow
moonlight, flooding in through the diamond panes, enabled one to see even colours, whilst
it softened the wealth of dust which lay over all and disguised in some measure the ravages
of time and moth. My lamp seemed to be of little effect in the brilliant moonlight,
but I was glad to have it with me, for there was a dreadful loneliness in the place which
chilled my heart and made my nerves tremble. Still, it was better than living alone in
the rooms which I had come to hate from the presence of the Count, and after trying a
little to school my nerves, I found a soft quietude come over me.
Here I am, sitting at a little oak table, where in old times possibly some fair lady
sat to pen, with much thought and many blushes, her ill-spelt love-letter, and writing in
my diary in shorthand all that has happened since I closed it last. It is the nineteenth
century, up to date with a vengeance, and yet, unless my senses deceive me, the old
centuries had, and have, powers of their own which mere modernity cannot kill.
Later, the morning of sixteenth May, God preserve my sanity, for to this I am reduced.
Safety, and the assurance of safety, are things of the past. Whilst I live on here, there
is but one thing to hope for, that I may not go mad, if indeed I be not mad already. If
I be sane, and surely it is maddening to think that of all the foul things that lurk in this
hateful place, the Count is the least dreadful to me, that to him alone I can look for safety,
even though this be only whilst I can serve his purpose. Great God! Merciful God! Let
me be calm, for out of that way lies madness indeed.
I begin to get new lights on certain things which have puzzled me. Up to now I never quite
knew what Shakespeare meant when he made Hamlet say, My tablets, quick, my tablets, tis meat
that I put it down, etc. For now, feeling as though my own brain were unhinged, or
as if the shock had come which must end in its undoing, I turn to my diary for repose.
The habit of entering accurately must help to soothe me.
The Count's mysterious warning frightened me at the time. It frightens me more now when
I think of it, for in the future he has a fearful hold upon me. I shall fear to doubt
what he may say.
When I had written in my diary, and had fortunately replaced the book and pen in my pocket, I
felt sleepy. The Count's warning came into my mind, but I took pleasure in disobeying
it. The sense of sleep was upon me, and with it the obstinacy which sleep brings as outrider.
The soft moonlight soothed, and the wide expanse without gave a sense of freedom which refreshed
me. I determined not to return to-night to the gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here,
where of old ladies had sat and sung and lived sweet lives whilst their gentle breasts were
sad for their menfolk away in the midst of remorseless wars. I drew a great couch out
of its place near the corner, so that as I lay I could look at the lovely view to east
and south, and unthinking of and uncaring for the dust, compose myself for sleep. I
suppose I must have fallen asleep. I hope so, but I fear, for all that followed was
startlingly real, so real that now sitting here in the broad full sunlight of the morning
I cannot in the least believe that it was all sleep. I was not alone. The room was the
same, unchanged in any way since I came into it. I could see along the floor, in the brilliant
moonlight, my own footsteps marked where I had disturbed the long accumulation of dust.
In the moonlight opposite me were three young women, ladies by their dress and manner. I
thought at the time that I must be dreaming when I saw them. They threw no shadow on the
floor. They came close to me and looked at me for some time, and then whispered together.
Two were dark, and had high aquiline noses, like the Count, and great, dark, piercing
eyes that seemed to be almost red when contrasted with the pale yellow moon. The other was fair,
as fair as can be, with great masses of golden hair and eyes like pale gold. I could not
feel sapphires. I seemed somehow to know her face, and to know it in connection with some
dreamy fear, but I could not recollect at the moment how or where. All three had brilliant
white teeth that shone like pearls against the ruby of their voluptuous lips.
There was something about them that made me uneasy, some longing, at the same time some
deadly fear. I felt in my heart a wicked, burning desire that they would kiss me with
those red lips. It is not good to note this down, lest some day it should meet Mina's
eyes and cause her pain, but it is the truth. They whispered together, and then they all
three laughed. Such a silvery musical laugh, but as hard as though the sound never could
have come through the softness of human lips. It was like the intolerable, tingling sweetness
of water-glasses when played on by a cunning hand. The fair girl shook her head coquettishly,
and the other two urged her on. One said,
Go on. You are the first. We shall follow. Yours is the right to begin.
The other added, He is young and strong. There are kisses for us all.
I lay quiet, looking out from under my eyelashes in an agony of delightful anticipation. The
fair girl advanced and bent over me till I could feel the movement of her breath upon
me. Sweet it was in one sense, honey sweet, and
sent the same tingling through the nerves as her voice, but with a bitter underlying
the sweet, a bitter offensiveness as one smells in blood.
I was afraid to raise my eyelids, but looked out and saw perfectly under the lashes. The
girl went on her knees and bent over me, simply gloating. There was a deliberate sense of
voluptuousness which was both thrilling and repulsive, and as she arched her neck she
actually licked her lips like an animal, till I could see in the moonlight the moisture
shining on the scarlet lips and on the red tongue as it lapped the white lips.
Sweet, sharp teeth. Lower and lower went her head as the lips went below the range of my
mouth and chin and seemed to fasten on my throat.
Then she paused, and I could hear the churning sound of her tongue as it licked her lips
and teeth, and I could feel the hot breath on my neck.
Then the skin of my throat began to tingle as one's flesh does when the hand that is
to tickle it approaches nearer, nearer. I could feel the soft, shivering touch of her
lips on the super-sensitive skin of my throat, and the hard dents of two sharp teeth just
touching and pausing there. I closed my eyes in languorous ecstasy, and when I saw her
I waited, waited with beating heart. But at that instant another sensation swept through
me as quick as lightning. I was conscious of the presence of the Count and of his being
as if I lapped in a storm of fury. As my eyes opened involuntarily I saw something
his strong hand grasp the slender neck of the fair woman, and with giant's power drawed
back, the blue eyes transformed with fury, the white teeth champing with rage, and the
fair cheeks blazing red with passion. But the Count, never did I imagine such wrath
and fury even to the demons of the pit. His eyes were positively blazing. The red light
in them was lurid as if the flames of hell-fire blazed behind them. His face was deathly pale,
and the lines of it were hard like drawn wires. The thick eyebrows that met over the nose
now seemed like a heaving bar of white-hot metal. With a fierce sweep of his arm he hurled
the woman from him, and then motioned to the others as though he were beating them back.
It was the same imperious gesture that I had seen used to the wolves, in a voice which
though low and almost in a whisper seemed to cut through the air and then ring in the
room, he said, How dare you touch him, any of you! How dare you cast eyes on him when
I have forbidden it! Back, I tell you all! This man is not a wolf. He is not a wolf.
This man belongs to me. Beware how you meddle with him, or you'll have to deal with me.
The fair girl, with a laugh of ribald coquetry, turned to answer him, You yourself never loved,
you never love. On this the other women joined, and such a mirthless, hard, soulless laughter
rang through the room that it almost made me faint to hear. It seemed like the pleasure
of fiends. Then the count turned, after looking at my face attentively and said in a soft
whisper, Yes, I too can love. You yourselves can tell it from the past. Is it not so? Well,
now I promise you that when I am done with him, you shall kiss him at your will. Now
go, go! I must have vacant him, for there is work to be done.
Are we to have nothing tonight? said one of them, with a low laugh, as she pointed to
the bag which he had thrown upon the floor, and which moved as though there were some
living thing within it. For answer he nodded his head. One of the women jumped forward
and opened it. If my ears did not deceive me, there was a gasp and a low wail as of
a half-smothered child. The women closed round, whilst I was aghast with horror.
But as I looked, they disappeared, and with them that dreadful bag. There was no door
near them, and they could not have passed me without my noticing. They simply seemed
to fade into the rays of the moonlight and pass out through the window, for I could see
outside the dim, shadowy forms for a moment, before they entirely faded away. Then the
horror overcame me, and I sank down, unconscious.
Jonathan Harker's Journal Continued
18th of May
19th of May
There is a chance of escape, or at any rate of being able to send word home.
A band of Sagani have come to the castle and are encamped in the courtyard.
These are gypsies. I have notes of them in my book.
They are peculiar to this part of the world, though allied to the ordinary gypsies all the
world over. There are thousands of them in Hungary and Transylvania who are almost outside all law.
They attach themselves as a rule to some great noble or boyar and call themselves by his name.
They are fearless and without religion, save superstition,
and they talk only their own varieties of the Romani tongue.
I shall write some letters home and shall try to get them to have them posted.
I have already spoken to them through my window to begin acquaintanceship.
They took their hats off and made obeisance and many signs,
which however I could not understand any more than I could their spoken language.
I have written the letters. Minas is in shorthand and I simply ask Mr. Hawkins to communicate with
her. To her I have explained my situation, but without the horrors which I may only surmise.
It would shock and frighten her to death were I to expose my heart to her.
Should the letters not carry, then the Count shall not yet know my secret or the extent of my
knowledge. I have given the letters. I threw them through the bars of my window with a gold
piece and made what signs I could to have them posted. The man who took them pressed them to his
heart and bowed and then put them in his cap. I could do no more. I stole back to the study
and began to read. As the Count did not come in, I have written here,
The Count has come. He sat down beside me and said in his smoothest voice as he opened two letters,
The Sagani has given me these, of which though I know not whence they come, I shall of course
take care. See, he must have looked at it. One is from you and to my friend Peter Hawkins.
The other, here he caught sight of the strange symbols as he opened the envelope,
and the dark look came into his face and his eyes blazed wickedly.
The other is a vile thing, an outrage upon friendship and hospitality. It is not signed.
Well, so it cannot matter to us. And he calmly held letter and envelope
in the flame of the lamp till they were consumed.
Then he went on. The letter to Hawkins that I shall, of course, send on since it is yours.
Your letters are sacred to me. Your pardon, my friend, that unknowingly I did break the seal.
Will you not cover it again? He held out the letter to me and with a courteous bow handed me
a clean envelope. I could only redirect it and hand it to him in silence.
When he went out of the room I could hear the key turn softly.
A minute later I went over and tried it, and the door was locked.
When, an hour or two after, the Count came quietly into the room,
his coming awakened me, for I had gone to sleep on the sofa. He was very courteous and very
cheery in his manner, and seeing that I had been sleeping he said,
So, my friend, you are tired. Get to bed. There is the surest rest.
I may not have the pleasure of talk tonight, since there are many labours to me.
But you will sleep, I pray.
I passed to my room and went to bed, and, strange to say, slept without dreaming.
Despair has its own calms.
This morning when I woke I thought I would provide myself with some papers and envelopes
from my bag and keep them in my pocket, so that I might write in case I should get an opportunity.
But again, a surprise. Again, a shock. Every scrap of paper was gone, and with it all my notes,
my memoranda, relating to railways and travel, my letter of credit, in fact all that might be
useful to me were I once outside the castle. I was in a hurry to go to bed, and I had been
in the castle. I sat and pondered a while, and then some thought occurred to me, and I made
search of my portmanteau and in the wardrobe where I had placed my clothes. The suit in which I had
travelled was gone, and also my overcoat and rug. I could find no trace of them anywhere.
This looked like some new scheme of villainy.
17th of June
This morning as I was sitting on the edge of my bed, cudgeling my brains, I heard without
a crackling of whips and pounding and scraping of horses' feet up the rocky path beyond the
courtyard. With joy I hurried to the window and saw drive into the yard two great lighter wagons,
each drawn by eight sturdy horses, and at the head of each pair a Slovak, with his wide hat,
great nail-studded belt, dirty sheepskin and high boots. They had also their long staves in hand.
I ran to the door intending to descend and try to join them through the main hall,
as I thought that way might be opened for them. Again a shock, my door was fastened on the outside.
Then I ran to the window and cried to them. They looked up at me stupidly and pointed,
but just then the hat man of the Tsigani came out and, seeing them pointing to my window,
said something, at which they laughed.
Henceforth no effort of mine, no piteous cry or agonized entreaty, would make them even look at
me. They resolutely turned away. The lighter wagons contained great square boxes with handles of
thick rope. These were evidently empty by the ease with which the Slovaks handled them,
and by their resonance when they were roughly moved. When they were all unloaded and packed
in a great heap in one corner of the yard, the Slovaks were given some money by the Tsigani,
and, spitting on it for luck, lazily went each to his horse's head.
Shortly afterwards I heard the crackling of their whips die away in the distance.
24th of June. Last night the Count left me early and locked himself into his own room.
As soon as I dared I ran up the winding stair and looked out of the window, which opened south.
I thought I would watch for the Count, for there is something going on.
The Tsigani are quartered somewhere in the castle and are doing work of some kind.
I know it, for now and then I hear a far away muffled sound as of matic and spade,
and whatever it is, it must be the end of some ruthless villainy.
I had been at the window somewhat less than half an hour when I saw something coming out
of the Count's window. I drew back and watched carefully, and saw the whole man emerge.
It was a new shock to me to find that he had on the suit of clothes which I had worn whilst
travelling here, and slung over his shoulder the terrible bag which I had seen the women take away.
There could be no doubt as to his quest, and in my garb too.
This then is his new scheme of evil, that he will allow others to see me as they think,
so that he may both leave evidence that I have been seen in the towns or villages,
posting my own letters, and that any wickedness which he may do shall by the local people be
attributed to me. It makes me rage to think that this can go on, and whilst I am shut up here,
a veritable prisoner, but without that protection of the law which is even a
I thought I would watch for the Count's return, and for a long time sat doggedly at the window.
Then I began to notice that there were some quaint little specks floating in the rays of
the moonlight. They were like the tiniest grains of dust, and they whirled round and gathered in
clusters in a nebulous sort of way. I watched them with a sense of soothing, and a sort of
calm stole over me. I leaned back in the embrasure in a more comfortable position,
so that I could enjoy more fully the aerial gambling.
Something made me start up, a low, piteous howling of dogs somewhere far below in the valley,
which was hidden from my sight. Louder it seemed to ring in my ears, and the floating motes of dust
take new shapes to the sound as they danced in the moonlight. I felt myself struggling to awake to
some call of my instincts. Nay, my very soul was struggling, and my half-remembered sensibilities
were striving to answer the call. I was becoming hypnotized. Quicker and quicker danced the dust.
The moonbeams seemed to quiver as they went by me into the mass of gloom beyond.
More and more they gathered till they seemed to take dim phantom shapes.
And then I started, broad awake, in full possession of my senses, and ran screaming from the place.
The phantom shapes which were becoming gradually materialized from the moonbeams
were those three ghostly women to whom I was doomed.
I fled and felt somewhat safer in my own room where there was no moonlight
and where the lamp was burning brightly.
When a couple of hours had passed, I heard something stirring in the Count's room,
something like a sharp wail quickly suppressed. And then there was silence, deep, awful silence,
which chilled me. With a beating heart, I tried the door, but I was locked in my
prison and could do nothing. I sat down and simply cried.
As I sat, I heard a sound in the courtyard without, the agonized cry of a woman.
I rushed to the window, and throwing it up, peered between the bars.
There, indeed, was a woman with disheveled hair, holding her hands over her heart,
as one distressed with running. She was leaning against the corner of the gateway.
When she saw my face at the window, she threw herself forward and shouted in a voice
laden with menace, Monster, give me my child. She threw herself on her knees,
and raising up her hands, cried the same words in tones which rung my heart.
Then she tore her hair and beat her breast and abandoned herself to all the violences
of extravagant emotion. Finally she threw herself forward, and though I could not see her,
I could hear the beating of her naked hands against the door.
Somewhere high overhead, probably on the tower, I heard the voice of the count calling in his harsh
metallic whisper. His call seemed to be answered from far and wide by the howling of wolves.
Before many minutes had passed, a pack of them poured like a pent-up dam when liberated,
through the wide entrance into the courtyard. There was no cry from the woman,
and the howling of the wolves was but short. Before long they streamed away singly, licking their lips.
I could not pity her, for I knew now what had become of her child, and she was better dead.
What shall I do? What can I do? How can I escape from this dreadful thing of night, gloom, and fear?
25th of June
No man knows till he has suffered from the night
how sweet and dear to his heart and eye the morning can be.
When the sun grew so high this morning that it struck the top of the great gateway opposite my
window, the high spot which it touched seemed to me as if the dove from the ark had lighted there.
My fear fell from me as if it had been a vaporous garment which dissolved in the warmth.
I must take action of some sort whilst the courage of the day is upon me.
Last night one of my post-dated letters went to post, the first of that fatal series which is to
blot out the very traces of my existence from the earth. Let me not think of it. Action.
It has always been at night time that I've been molested or threatened or in some way in danger or in fear.
I have not yet seen the count in the daylight. Can it be that he sleeps when others wake?
That he may be awake whilst they sleep? If I could only get into his room.
But there is no possible way. The door is always locked. No way for me.
Yes, there is a way, if one dares to take it. Where his body has gone, why may not another body go?
I have seen him myself crawl from his window. Why should not I imitate him and go in by his window?
The chances are desperate, but my need is more desperate still.
I shall risk it. At the worst, it can only be death. And a man's death is not a calf's.
And the dreaded hereafter may still be open to me. God help me in my task.
Goodbye, Mina, if I fail. Goodbye, my faithful friend and second father.
Goodbye, all, and last of all, Mina.
Same day, later. I have made the effort, and, God helping me, have come safely back to this room.
I must put down every detail in order. I went whilst my courage was fresh, straight to the window on the south side, and at once got outside on this side.
The stones are big and roughly cut, and the mortar has by process of time been washed away between them.
I took off my boots and ventured out on the desperate way.
I looked down once, so as to make sure that a sudden glimpse of the awful depth would not overcome me, but after that kept my eyes away from it.
I know pretty well the direction and distance of the Count's window, and made for it as well as I could, having regard to the opportunities available.
I did not feel dizzy, I suppose I was too excited, and the time seemed ridiculously short, till I found myself standing on the windowsill and trying to raise up the sash.
I was filled with agitation, however, when I bent down and slid feet foremost in through the window.
Then I looked around for the Count, but with surprise and gladness made a discovery.
The room was empty. It was barely furnished with odd things which seemed to have never been used.
The furniture was something the same style as that in the south rooms, and was covered with dust.
I looked for the key, but it was not in the lock, and I could not find it anywhere.
The only thing I found was a great heap of gold in one corner, gold of all kinds.
Roman, and British, and Austrian, and Hungarian, and Greek, and Turkish money, covered with a film of dust as though it had lain long on the ground.
None of it that I noticed was less than 300 years old.
There were also chains and ornaments, some jeweled, but all of them old and stained.
At one corner of the room was a heavy door.
I tried it, for since I could not find the key of the room or the key of the outer door, which was the main object of my search,
I must make further examination, or all my efforts would be in vain.
It was open, and led through a stone passage to a circular stairway which went steeply down.
I descended, minding carefully where I went, for the stairs were dark, being only lit by loopholes in the heavy masonry.
At the bottom there was a dark, tunnel-like passage through which came a deathly,
sickly odor, the odor of old earth newly turned.
As I went through the passage the smell grew closer and heavier.
At last I pulled open a heavy door which stood ajar, and found myself in an old ruined chapel, which had evidently been used as a graveyard.
The roof was broken, and in two places were steps leading to vaults,
but the ground had recently been dug over, and the earth placed in great wooden boxes.
Manifestly those which had been brought by the Slovaks.
There was nobody about, and I made a search over every inch of the ground so as not to lose a chance.
I went down even into the vaults, where the dim light struggled, although to do so was a dread to my very soul.
Into two of these I went, but saw nothing except fragments of old coffins and piles of dust.
In the third, however, I made a discovery.
There, in one of the great boxes, of which there were fifty in all, on a pile of newly dug earth, lay the Count.
He was either dead or asleep.
I could not say which, for eyes were open and stony, but without the glassiness of death,
and the cheeks had the warmth of life through all their pallor.
The lips were as red as ever,
but there was no sign of movement, no pulse, no breath.
No beating of the heart.
I bent over him and tried to find any sign of life, but in vain.
He could not have lain there long, for the earthy smell would have passed away in a few hours.
By the side of the box was its cover, pierced with holes here and there.
I thought he might have the keys on him, but when I went to search I saw the dead eyes,
and in them dead, though they were,
such look of hate.
Though unconscious of me or my presence, that I fled from the place, and leaving the Count's room by the window,
crawled again up the castle wall.
Regaining my room, I threw myself panting upon the bed and tried to think.
29th of June.
Today is the date of my last letter, and the Count has taken steps to prove that it was genuine,
for again I saw him leave the castle by the same window and in my clothes.
As he went down the wall, lizard fashion, I wished I had a gun or some lethal weapon that I might destroy him.
But I fear that no weapon wrought along by man's hand would have any effect upon him.
I dared not wait to see him return, for I feared to see those weird sisters.
I came back to the library and read there till I fell asleep.
I was awakened by the Count,
who looked at me as grimly as a man could look, as he said,
Tomorrow, my friend, we must part.
You return to your beautiful England,
eye to some work which may have such an end that we may never meet.
Your letter home has been dispatched.
Tomorrow I shall not be here,
but all shall be ready for your journey.
In the morning come the Sagani, who have some labors of their own here,
and also come some Slovaks.
When they have gone, my carriage shall come for you,
and shall bear you to the Borgo Pass
to meet the diligence from Bokovena to Bistritz.
But I am in hopes that I shall see more of you at Castle Dracula.
I suspected him and determined to test his sincerity.
Sincerity seems like a profanation of the word to write it in connection with such a monster,
so I asked him point-blank.
Why may I not go tonight?
Because, dear sir, my coachmen and horses are away on a mission.
But I would walk with pleasure. I want to get away at once.
He smiled such a soft, smooth diabolical smile
that I knew there was some trick behind his smoothness.
He said,
And your baggage?
I do not care about it. I can send for it some other time.
The Count stood up and said, with a sweet courtesy which made me rub my eyes, it seems so real,
You English have a saying which is close to my heart,
for its spirit is that which rules our boyars.
Welcome the coming. Speed the parting guest.
Come with me, my dear young friend.
Not an hour shall you wait in my house against your will,
though sad am I at your going, and that you so suddenly desire it.
Come.
With a stately gravity he, with the lamp, proceeded me down the stairs and along the hall.
Suddenly he stopped.
Hark!
Close at hand came the howling of many wolves.
It was almost as if the sounds sprang up at the rising of his hand,
just as the music of a great orchestra seems to leap under the baton of the conductor.
After a pause of a moment he proceeded in his stately way to the door,
drew back the ponderous bolts, unhooked the heavy chains, and began to draw it open.
To my intense astonishment I saw that it was unlocked.
Suspiciously I looked all around, but could see no key of any kind.
As the door began to open, the howling of the wolves without grew louder and angrier.
Their red jaws with champing teeth, and their blunt clawed feet as they leaped,
came in through the opening door.
I knew then that to struggle at the moment against the Count was useless.
With such allies as these at his command, I could do nothing.
But still the door continued slowly to open, and only the Count's body stood in a gap.
Suddenly it struck me that this might be the moment and means of my doom.
I was to be given to the wolves, and at my own instigation.
There was a diabolical wickedness in the idea great enough for the Count,
and as the last chance I cried out,
Shut the door! I shall wait till morning!
And I covered my face with my hands to hide my tears of bitter disappointment.
With one sweep of his powerful arm, the Count threw the door shut,
and the great bolts clanged and echoed through the hall as they shot back into their places.
In silence we returned to the library, and after a minute or two I went to my own room.
The last I saw of Count Dracula was his kissing his hand to me,
with a red light of triumph in his eyes, and with a smile that Judas in hell might be proud of.
When I was in my room and about to lie down, I thought I heard a whispering at my door.
I went to it softly and listened. Unless my ears deceived me, I heard the voice of the Count.
Back, back to your own place. Your time has not yet come.
Wait, have patience. Tonight is mine. Tomorrow night is yours.
There was a low sweet ripple of laughter, and in a rage I threw open the door,
and saw without the three terrible women licking their lips.
As I appeared, they all joined in a horrible laugh and ran away.
I came back to my room and threw myself on my knees. It is then so near the end.
Tomorrow, tomorrow. Lord, help me and those to whom I am dear.
30th of June. These may be the last words I ever write in this diary. I slept till just before the
dawn, and when I woke, threw myself on my knees, for I determined that if death came, he should
find me ready. At last I felt that subtle change in the air, and knew that the morning had come.
Then came the welcome cock crow, and I felt that I was safe.
With a glad heart, I opened the door and ran down the hall. I had seen that the door was unlocked,
and now escape was before me. With hands that trembled with eagerness, I unhooked the chains
and threw back the massive bolts. But the door would not move. Despair seized me. I pulled and
pulled at the door, and shook it till, massive as it was, it rattled in its casement. I could see the
count. Then a wild desire took me to obtain the key at any risk, and I determined then and there
to scale the wall again and gain the count's room. He might kill me, but death now seemed the happier
choice of evils. Without a pause, I rushed up to the east window and scrambled down the wall as
before, into the count's room. It was empty, but that was as I expected. I could not see a key
anywhere but the heap of gold remained. I went through the door in the corner and down the
winding stair and along the dark passage to the old chapel. I knew now well enough where to find
the monster I sought. The great box was in the same place, close against the wall, but the lid
was laid on it, not fastened down, but with the nails ready in their places to be hammered home.
I knew I must reach the body for the key, so I raised the lid and laid it back against the wall,
and then I saw something which filled my very soul with horror. There lay the count,
but looking as if his youth had been half restored, for the white hair and mustache were changed to
dark iron gray, the cheeks were fuller, and the white skin seemed ruby red underneath. The mouth
was redder than ever, for on the lips were gouts of fresh blood which trickled from the corners of
the mouth and ran down over the chin and neck. Even the deep burning eyes seemed set amongst
swollen flesh, for the lids and pouches underneath were bloated. It seemed as if the whole awful
creature was simply gorged with blood. He lay like a filthy leech, exhausted with his repletion.
I shuddered as I bent over to touch him, and every sense in me revolted at the contact,
but I had to search, or I was lost. The coming night might see my own body a banquet in a
similar war to those horrid three. I felt all over the body, but no sign could I find of the key.
Then I stopped and looked at the count.
There was a mocking smile on the bloated face which seemed to drive me mad. This was the being
I was helping to transfer to London, where perhaps for centuries to come he might, amongst his
teeming millions, satiate his lust for blood and create a new and ever-widening circle of semi-demons
to batten on the helpless. The very thought drove me mad. A terrible desire came upon me to rid the
shovel which the workmen had been using to fill the cases, and lifting it high, struck with the
edge downward at the hateful face. But as I did so, the head turned and the eyes fell upon me with
all their blaze of basilisk horror. The sight seemed to paralyze me, and the shovel turned in
my hand and glanced from my face, merely making a deep gash above the forehead. The shovel fell
from my hand across the box, and as I pulled it away, the flange of the blade caught the edge of
the lid which fell over again and hid the horrid thing from my sight. The last glimpse I had was
of the bloated face, blood-stained and fixed with a grin of malice which would have held its own in
the nethermost hell. I thought and thought what should be my next move, but my brain seemed on
fire, and I waited with a despairing feeling growing over me. As I waited, I heard in the
through their song the rolling of heavy wheels and the cracking of whips.
The sigarni and the slovaks of whom the Count had spoken were coming.
With a last look around and at the box which contained the vile body, I ran from the place
and gained the Count's room determined to rush out at the moment the door should be opened.
With strained ears, I listened and heard downstairs the grinding of the key in the great lock
and the falling back of the heavy door. There must have been some other means of entry,
or someone had a key for one of the locked doors. Then there came the sound of many feet
tramping and dying away in some passage which sent up a clanging echo. I turned to run down again
towards the vault where I might find the new entrance, but at the moment there seemed to come
a violent puff of wind and the door to the winding stair blew too with a shock that set the dust from
the lintels flying. When I ran to push it open, I found that it was hopelessly fast.
I was again a prisoner and the net of doom was closing around me more closely.
As I write, there is in the passage below a sound of many tramping feet and the crash of
weights being set down heavily, doubtless the boxes with their freight of earth.
There was a sound of hammering. It is the box being nailed down.
Now I can hear the heavy feet tramping again along the hall with many other idle feet coming
behind them. The door is shut. The chains rattle. There is a grinding of the key in the lock.
I can hear the key withdrawn, then another door opens and shuts.
I hear the creaking of lock and bolt. Hark! In the courtyard and down the rocky way,
the roll of heavy wheels, the crack of whips, and the chorus of the sagani as they pass into the
distance. I am alone in the castle with those horrible women.
Mina is a woman and there is not in common. They are devils of the pit.
I shall not remain alone with them. I shall try to scale the castle wall farther than I have
yet attempted. I shall take some of the gold with me lest I want it later. I may find a way from
this dreadful place. And then a way for home. A way to the quickest and nearest train,
away from the cursed spot, from this cursed land where the devil and his children still walk with
earthly feet. At least God's mercy is better than that of those monsters and the precipice
is steep and high. At its foot a man may sleep as a man. Goodbye all. Mina.
LETTER FROM MISS MENA MURRAY TO MISS LUCY WESTONRAH
9th of May
When we are married, I shall be able to be useful to Jonathan, and if I can stenograph well enough, I can take down what he wants to say in this way, and write it out for him on the typewriter, at which also I am practicing very hard.
He and I sometimes write letters in shorthand, and he is keeping a stenographic journal of his travels abroad. When I am with you, I shall keep a diary in the same way. I don't mean one of those two pages to the week with Sunday squeezed in a corner diaries, but a sort of journal which I can write in whenever I feel inclined.
I do not suppose there will be much of interest to other people, but it is not intended for them. I may show it to Jonathan some day, if there is in it anything worth sharing, but it is really an exercise book. I shall try to do what I see lady journalists do, interviewing and writing descriptions, and trying to remember conversations.
I am told that, with a little practice, one can remember all that goes on or that one hears said during a day. However, we shall see. I will tell you of my little plans when we meet. I have just had a few hurried lines from Jonathan from Transylvania. He is well, and will be returning in about a week. I am longing to hear all his news.
It must be nice to see strange countries. I wonder if we—I mean Jonathan and I—shall ever see them together. There is the ten o'clock bell ringing. Good-bye, your loving Mina. Tell me all the news when you write. You have not told me anything for a long time. I hear rumours, and especially of a tall, handsome, curly-haired man.
Letter Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray
17 Chatham Street, Wednesday
Someone has evidently been telling tales. That was Mr. Homewood. He often comes to see us, and he and Mama get on very well together. They have so many things to talk about in common.
We met some time ago, a man that would just do for you if you were not already engaged to Jonathan. He is an excellent party, being handsome, well-off, and of good birth. He is a doctor, and really clever—just fancy. He is only nine and twenty, and he has an immense lunatic asylum all under his own care.
Mr. Homewood introduced him to me, and he called here to see us, and often comes now. I think he is one of the most resolute men I ever saw, and yet the most calm. He seems absolutely imperturbable. I can fancy what a wonderful power he must have over his patience. He has a curious habit of looking one straight in the face, as if trying to read one's thoughts. He tries this on very much with me, but I flatter myself he has got a tough nut to crack. I know that from my glass.
Do you ever try to read your own face? I do, and I can tell you it is not a bad study, and it gives you more trouble than you can well fancy if you have never tried it. He says that I afford him a curious psychological study, and I humbly think I do.
I do not, as you know, take sufficient interest in dress to be able to describe the new fashions. Dress is a bore. That is slang again, but never mind. Arthur says that every day.
There, it is all out, Mina. We have told all our secrets to each other since we were children. We have slept together and eaten together, and laughed and cried together, and now, though I have spoken, I would like to speak more. Oh, Mina, couldn't you guess? I love him. I am blushing as I write, for although I think he loves me, he has not told me so in words. But oh, Mina, I love him. I love him. There, that does me good.
I wish I were with you, dear, sitting by the fire and dressing as we used to sit, and I would try to tell you what I feel. I do not know how I am writing this even to you. I am afraid to stop, or I should tear up the letter, and I don't want to stop, for I do so want to tell you all. Let me hear from you at once, and tell me all that you think about it. Mina, pray for my happiness. Lucy. P.S. I need not tell you this is a secret. Good night again, L.
Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray. 24th of May.
My dearest Mina, thanks and thanks and thanks again for your sweet letter. It was so nice to be able to tell you and to have your sympathy.
My dear, it never rains, but it pours. How true the old Proverbs are! Here am I, who shall be twenty in September, and yet I never had a proposal till to-day, not a real proposal, and to-day I had three! Just fancy, three proposals in one day! Isn't it awful? I feel sorry, really and truly sorry, for two of the poor fellows.
Oh Mina, I am so happy that I don't know what to do with myself, and three proposals! But for goodness sake, don't tell any of the girls, or they would be getting all sorts of extravagant ideas, and imagining themselves injured and slighted if in their very first day at home they did not get six at least. Some girls are so vain! You and I, Mina dear, who are engaged and are going to settle down soon soberly until old married women can despise vanity.
Well, I must tell you about the three, but you must keep it a secret, dear, from everyone, except of course Jonathan. You will tell him, because I would, if I were in your place, certainly tell Arthur. A woman ought to tell her husband everything, don't you think so, dear? And I must be fair. Men like women, certainly their wives, to be quite as fair as they are, and women, I am afraid, are not always quite as fair as they should be.
Well, my dear, number one came just before lunch. I told you of him, Dr. John Seward, the lunatic asylum man, with the strong jaw and the good forehead. He was very cool outwardly, but was nervous all the same. He had evidently been schooling himself as to all sorts of little things, and remembered them, but he almost managed to sit down on his silk hat, which men don't generally do when they are cool.
And then when he wanted to appear at ease he kept playing with the lancet in a way that made me nearly scream. He spoke to me, Mina, very straightforwardly. He told me how dear I was to him, though he had known me so little, and what his life would be with me to help and cheer him. He was going to tell me how unhappy he would be if I did not care for him, but when he saw me cry he said he was a brute and would not add to my present trouble.
Then he broke off and asked if I could love him in time, and when I shook my head his hands trembled, and then with some hesitation he asked me if I cared already for anyone else. He put it very nicely, saying that he did not want to wring my confidence from me, but only to know because if a woman's heart was free a man might have hope.
And then, Mina, I felt a sort of duty to tell him that there was someone. I only told him that much. And then he stood up, and he looked very strong and very grave, as he took both my hands in his and said he hoped I would be happy, and that if I ever wanted a friend I must count him one of my best.
Oh, Mina dear, I can't help crying, and you must excuse this letter being all blotted. Being proposed to is all very nice and all that sort of thing, but it isn't at all a happy thing when you have to see a poor fellow, whom you know loves you honestly, going away and looking all broken-hearted, and to know that, no matter what he may say at the moment, you are passing out of his life. My dear, I must stop here at present. I feel so miserable, though I am so happy.
Evening.
My dear, I am somewhat previous. Mr. Quincy P. Morris found me alone. It seems that a man always does find a girl alone. No, he doesn't, for Arthur tried twice to make a chance, and I helping him all I could, I am not ashamed to say it now.
I must tell you beforehand that Mr. Morris doesn't always speak slang, that is to say, he never does so to strangers or before them, for he is really well educated and has exquisite manners, but he found out that it amused me to hear him talk American slang, and whenever I was present there was no one to be shocked, he said such funny things.
I am afraid, my dear, he has to invent it all, for it fits exactly into whatever else he has to say. But this is the way slang has. I do not know myself if I shall ever speak slang. I do not know if Arthur likes it, as I have never heard him use any as yet.
Well, Mr. Morris sat down beside me and looked as happy and jolly as he could, but I could see all the same that he was very nervous. He took my hand in his and said ever so sweetly.
Miss Lucy, I know I ain't good enough to regulate the fixings of your little shoes, but I guess if you wait till you find a man that is, you will go join them seven young women with the lamps when you quit. Won't you just hitch up alongside of me and let us go down the long road together, driving in double harness?
Well, he did look so good-humored and so jolly that it didn't seem half so hard to refuse him as it did poor Dr. Seward. So I said, as lightly as I could, that I did not know anything of hitching, and that I wasn't broken to harness at all yet.
Then he said that he had spoken in a light manner, and he hoped that if he had made a mistake in doing so on so grave, so momentous, and occasioned for him, I would forgive him. He really did look serious when he was saying it, and I couldn't help feeling a sort of exultation that he was number two in one day.
And then, my dear, before I could say a word, he began pouring out a perfect torrent of love-making, laying his very heart and soul at my feet. He looked so earnest over it that I shall never again think that a man must be playful always and never earnest because he is merry at times. I suppose he saw something in my face which checked him, for he suddenly stopped and said with a sort of manly fervor that I could have loved him for if I had been free.
Lucy, you are an honest-hearted girl, I know. I should not be here speaking to you as I am now if I did not believe you clean grit, right through to the very depths of your soul. Tell me, like one good fella to another, is there anyone else that you care for? And if there is, I'll never trouble you a hair's breadth again, but will be, if you will let me, a very faithful friend.
My dear Mina, why are men so noble when we women are so little worthy of them? Here was I almost making fun of this great-hearted, true gentleman. I burst into tears, I am afraid, my dear, you will think this a very sloppy letter in more ways than one, and I really felt very badly. Why can't they let a girl marry three men, or as many as want her, and save all this trouble? But this is heresy, and I must not say it.
I am glad to say that, though I was crying, I was able to look into Mr. Morris's brave eyes, and I told him out straight. Yes, there is someone I love, though he has not told me yet that he even loves me.
I was right to speak to him so frankly, for quite a light came into his face, and he put out both his hands and took mine, I think I put them into his, and said in a hearty way,
That's my brave girl. It's better worth being late for a chance of winning you than being in time for any other girl in the world. Don't cry, my dear. If it's for me, I'm a hard nut to crack, and I take it standing up. If that other fellow doesn't know his happiness, well, he'd better look for it soon, or he'll have to deal with me. Little girl, your honesty and pluck have made me a friend, and that's rarer than a lover. It's more selfish, anyhow.
My dear, I'm going to have a pretty lonely walk between this and Kingdom Come. Won't you give me one kiss? It'll be something to keep off the darkness now and then. You can, you know, if you like, for that other good fellow, or you could not love him, hasn't spoken yet.
That quite won me, Mina, for it was brave and sweet of him, and noble too, to a rival, wasn't it? And he so sad, so I leaned over and kissed him. He stood up with my two hands in his, and as he looked down into my face, I'm afraid I was blushing very much. He said, Little girl, I hold your hand, and you've kissed me, and if these things don't make us friends, nothing ever will. Thank you for your sweet honesty to me, and good-bye.
He rung my hand, and taking up his hat, went straight out of the room without looking back, without a tear or a quiver or a pause, and I am crying like a baby. Why must a man like that be made unhappy when there are lots of girls about who would worship the very ground he trod on? I know I would if I were free, only I don't want to be free.
My dear, this quite upset me, and I feel I cannot write of happiness just at once after telling you of it, and I don't wish to tell of the number three until it can be all happy. Ever your loving, Lucy.
P.S. Oh, about number three, I needn't tell you of number three, need I? Besides, it was all so confused. It seemed only a moment from his coming into the room till both his arms were round me and he was kissing me. I am very, very happy, and I don't know what I have done to deserve it. I must only try in the future to show that I am not ungrateful to God for all his goodness to me in sending to me such a lover, such a husband, and such a friend. Good-bye.
Dr. Seward's Diary, Captain Phonograph
May 25
Ebb tide and appetite today. Cannot eat, cannot rest, so diary instead. Since my rebuff of yesterday I have a sort of empty feeling. Nothing in the world seems of sufficient importance to be worth the doing. As I knew that the only cure for this sort of thing was work, I went amongst the patients. I picked out one who has afforded me a study of much interest.
He is so quaint that I am determined to understand him as well as I can. Today I seem to get nearer than ever before to the heart of his mystery.
I question him more fully than I had ever done, with a view to making myself master of the facts of his hallucination. In my manner of doing it there was, I now see, something of cruelty. I seem to wish to keep him to the point of his madness, a thing which I avoid with the patience as I would the mouth of hell.
Memorandum. Under what circumstances would I not avoid the pit of hell?
Omnia Romei Venalia sunt. Hell has its price. If there be anything behind this instinct, it would be valuable to trace it afterwards accurately, so I had better commence to do so, therefore...
R. M. Renfield, age 59.
When self is the fixed point, the centripetal force is balanced with the centrifugal. When duty, a cause, etc., is the fixed point, the latter force is paramount, and only accident or a series of accidents can balance it.
Letter. Quincy P. Morris to Honorable Arthur Homewood. 25th of May.
My dear Art, we've told yarns by the campfire and the prairies, and dressed one another's wounds after trying a landing at the Marquesas, and drunk healths on the shore of Titicaca. There are more yarns to be told, and other wounds to be healed, and other health to be drunk.
Won't you let this be at my campfire tomorrow night? I have no hesitation in asking you, as I know a certain lady is engaged to a certain dinner party, and that you are free.
There will only be one other, our old pal at the Correa, Jack Seward. He's coming too, and we both want to mingle our weeps over the wine cup, and to drink a health with all our hearts to the happiest man in all the wide world, who has won the noblest heart that God has made, and best worth winning.
We promise you a hearty welcome, and a loving greeting, and a health as true as your own right hand. We shall both swear to leave you at home if you drink too deep to a certain pair of eyes. Come, yours as ever and always, Quincy P. Morris.
Telegram from Arthur Holmwood to Quincy P. Morris. 26th of May.
Count me in every time. I bear messages which will make both your ears tingle. Art.
MENA MURRAY'S JOURNAL
24th July. Whitby. Lucy met me at the station, looking sweeter and lovelier than ever, and
we drove up to the house at the crescent in which they have rooms. This is a lovely place.
The little river, the Esk, runs through a deep valley, which broadens out as it comes
near the harbor. A great viaduct runs across, with high piers, through which the view seems
away than it really is. The valley is beautifully green, and it is so steep that when you are
on the high land on either side you look right across it, unless you are near enough to see
down. The houses of the old town, the sight away from us, are all red-roofed, and seem
piled up one over the other anyhow, like the pictures we see of Nuremberg. Right over the
town is the ruin of Whitby Abbey, which was sacked by the Danes, and which is the scene
of part of Marmion, where the girl was built up, in the wall. It is a most noble ruin,
of immense size, and full of beautiful and romantic bits. There is a legend that a white
lady is seen in one of the windows. Between it and the town there is another church, the
parish one, round which is a big graveyard, all full of tombstones. This is, to my mind,
the nicest spot in Whitby, for it lies right over the town, and has a full view of the
harbour, and all up the bay to where the headland called Kettleness stretches out into the sea.
It descends so steeply over the harbour that part of the bank has fallen away, and some
of the graves have been destroyed. In one place part of the stonework of the graves
stretches out over the sandy pathway far below. There are walks with seats beside them through
the churchyard, and people go and sit there all day long, looking at the beautiful view
and enjoying the breeze. I shall come and sit here often myself in work. Indeed, I am
writing now, with my book on my knee, and listening to the talk of three old men who
are sitting beside me. They seem to do nothing all day but sit here and talk.
The harbour lies below me, with on the far side one long granite wall stretching out
into the sea, with a curve outwards at the end of it, in the middle of which is a lighthouse.
A heavy seawall runs along outside of it. On the near side the seawall makes an elbow
crooked inversely, and its end too has a lighthouse. Between the two piers there is a narrow opening
into the harbour, which then suddenly widens. It is nice at high water, but when the tide
is out it shoals away to nothing, and there is merely the stream of the esk running between
banks of sand with rocks here and there. Outside the harbour, on this side, there rises for
about half a mile a great reef, the sharp of which runs straight out from behind the
south lighthouse. At the end of it is a buoy with a bell, which swings in bad weather and
sends in a mournful sound on the wind. They have a legend here that when a ship is lost
bells are heard out at sea. I must ask the old man about this. He is coming this way.
He is a funny old man. He must be awfully old, for his face is gnarled and twisted like
the bark of a tree. He tells me that he is nearly a hundred, and that he was a sailor
in the Greenland fishing fleet when Waterloo was fought. He is, I am afraid, a very sceptical
person, for when I asked him about the bells at sea and the white lady at the abbey he
said very brusquely, I wouldn't fash myself about them, miss. Them things we all wore
out. Mind, I don't say that they never was, but I do say that they wasn't in my time.
They be all very well for comers and trippers and the like, but not for a nice young lady
like you. Them fit folks from York and Leeds that be always eatin' curd herons and drinkin'
tea and lookin' out to buy cheap jut with creed art. I wonder myself who'll be bothered
tellin' lies to them, even the newspapers, which is full of fool talk.
I thought he would be a good person to learn interesting things from, so I asked him if
he would mind telling me something about the whale fishing in the old days. He was just
settling himself to begin when the clock struck six, whereupon he laboured to get up and
said,
I must be gang a greenwoods home now, miss. My grand-daughter doesn't like to be kept
waitin' when the tea is ready, for it takes me time to cramble a boon the grease, for
there be many of them, and miss a lack barely timbersairly by the clock.
He hobbled away, and I could see him hurrying as well as he could down the steps. The steps
are a great feature on the place. They lead from the town to the church. There are hundreds
of them—I do not know how many—and they wind up in a delicate curve. The slope is
so gentle that a horse could easily walk up and down them. I think they must originally
have had something to do with the abbey.
I shall go home too. Lucy went out, visiting with her mother, and as they were only duty
calls I did not go.
First of August. I came up here an hour ago with Lucy, and we had a most interesting talk
with my old friend and the two others who always come and join him. He is evidently
the Sir Oracle of them, and I should think must have been in his time a most dictatorial
person. He would not admit anything and down faces everybody. If he can't out argue them
he bullies them and then takes their silence for agreement with his views.
Lucy was looking sweetly pretty in her white lawn frock. She has got a beautiful color
since she has been here.
I noticed that the old men did not lose any time in coming and sitting near her when we
sat down. She is so sweet with old people. I think they all fell in love with her on
spot. Even my old man succumbed and did not contradict her, but gave me double share instead.
I got him on the subject of the legends, and he went off at once into a sort of sermon.
I must try to remember it and put it down.
It be all fool talk, luck, stock and metal, that's what it be and not else. These bans
and laughs and bull-ghosts and bar-gasts and a-beldering, they be not but air-blibs. They
not grins and signs and warnings, be all invented by partisans and ill-some berk-botties and
railway-tartas to scare and scorn our halflings and to get folks to do something that they
don't other incline to. It makes me ireful to think of them. Why, it's them that, not
content with printing lies on paper and preaching them out of pulpits, does want to be cutting
them on the tombstones. Look here, all around you, in that air-three-well. All them stains
holding up their heads as well as the kind out of their pride is a kind simply tumbling
down with the weight of the lies wrote on them. Here lies the body, or sacred to the
memory wrote on all of them, and yet in thy half of them there beeth no bodies at all,
and the memories of them beeth care to pinch your snuff about, much less sacred. Lies all
of them, nothing but lies of one kind or another. My god, but it be a queer scoundrelment at
the day of judgment when they come tumbling up in their death-socks, all drooped together,
and trying to drag their tomb-stains with them to prove how good they was, some of them
trembling and dithering, with their hands dozened and slippery from lying in the sea
that they can't even keep their gurp of them.
I could see from the old fellow's self-satisfied air, and the way in which he looked round
for the approval of his cronies that he was showing off, so I put in a word to keep him
Oh, Mr. Swales, you can't be serious. Certainly these tomb-stones are not all wrong. Gablons,
there may be a poorest few not wrong, save in where they make out the people too good,
for there be folk that do think a bonbon be like the sea, if only it be their own. The
whole thing be only lies. Now look you here, you come here to a stranger, and you see this
kick goth.
I nodded, for I thought it better to assent, though I did not quite understand his dialect.
I knew it had something to do with the church.
He went on,
And you can say it that all this stands be a boon folk that be a hept here, snort and
snog.
I assented again.
Then that be just where the lie comes in. Why, there be scores of these lay-beds that
be true as old Dunn's back-a-box on Friday night. He nudged one of his companions, and
they all laughed. And, my God, how could there be otherwise? Look at that one, the athas
above the beer-bank. Read it.
I went over and read,
Edward Spence-la, master mariner, murdered by pirates off the coast of Andres, April
1854, age thirty. When I came back, Mr. Swills went on,
Who brought him home, I wonder, to hap him here? Murdered off the coast of Andres, and
you consented his body lay under. Why, I could name me a dozen whose bones lie in the Greenland
He pointed northwards, or where the currents may have drifted them. There be the stains
around ye. You can't with your young eyes read the small print of the lies from here.
This breath-wet Lowry, I knew his father, lost in the lively off Greenland in twenty.
Or Andrew Woodhouse, drowned in the same seas in 1777. Or John Paxton, drowned off Cape
farewell a year later, or old John Rowlings, whose grandfather sailed with me, drowned
in the Gulf of Finland in fifty. Do ye think that all these men will have to make a rush
to Whitby when the trumpet sounds? I have me anthems about it. I tell ye that when they
got here they be jumbling and jostling one another, the way that it would be like a fight
upon the ice in the old days, when we be at one another from daylight to dark, and trying
to tie up our cuts by the Arura Borealis. This was evidently local pleasantry, for the
old man cackled over it, and his cronies joined in with gusto.
But, I said, surely you are not quite correct, for you start on the assumption that all the
poor people or their spirits will have to take their tombstones with them on the day
of judgment. Do you think that that will be really necessary?
Well what else be the tombstones for? Answer me that, miss.
To please their relatives, I suppose.
To please their relatives, you suppose? This he said with intense scorn. How will it pleasure
their relatives to know that lies are wrote over them, and that everybody in the place
know that they be lies?
He pointed to a stone at our feet, which had been laid down as a slab, on which the seat
was rested, close to the edge of the cliff. Read the lies on that thrift-stone, he said.
The letters were upside down to me from where I sat, but Lucy was more opposite to them,
so she leant over and read—
Sacred to the memory of George Cannon, who died in the hope of glorious resurrection,
on July 20, 1873, falling from the rocks at Kettles. This tomb was erected by his sorrowing
mother to her dearly beloved son. He was the only son of his mother, and she was a widow.
Really, Mr. Swales, I don't see anything very funny in that."
She spoke her comment very gravely and somewhat severely.
"'You don't see aunt funny, ha-ha! But that's because your grand-a-sarnin' mother was a
hell-cat that hated him because he was a crooked, a regular lammeter he was, and he hated her
so that he committed suicide in order that she mightn't get an insurance she put on his
life. Blew neither top of his head off with an old musket that they had for scaring crows
with. Point for crows then, for it brought the clags and the dowps to him. That's the
way he fell off the rocks. And as to hopes of a glorious resurrection, I've often heard
him say myself that he hoped he'd go to hell, for his mother was so fierce that she'd be
sure to go to heaven, and he didn't want to idle where she was. Isn't that stunning at
any rate he hammered it with his stick as he spoke? Apocalypse! And won't it make Gabriel
when Geordi comes pantonutris with the tomb-stand balanced on his hump and asked to be took
as evidence?'
I did not know what to say, but Lucy turned the conversation as she said, rising up,
"'Oh, why did you tell us of this? It is my favorite seat, and I cannot leave it, and
now I find I must go on sitting over the grave of a suicide.'
"'That won't harm you, my pretty, and it may make poor Geordi gladsome to have so trim a
sitting on his lap. Ah, that won't hurt you. Why, I've sat here off and on for nigh twenty
years past, and it hasn't done me no harm. Don't you fash about them as lies unto ye,
or they doesn't lie there either. It'll be time for you to be getting scat when you see
the tomb-stains all run away with, and the place is bare as a stubble field.'
"'Ah, there's the clock, and I must go. I can serve as tea, ladies.' And off he hobbled.'
Lucy and I sat awhile, and it was all so beautiful before us that we took hands as we sat, and
she told me all over again about Arthur and their coming marriage. That made me just a
little heartsick, for I haven't heard from Jonathan for a whole month.
"'The same day. I came up here alone, for I am very sad. There was no letter for me.
I hope there cannot be anything the matter with Jonathan. The clock has just struck nine.
I see the lights scattered all over the town, sometimes in rows where the streets are, and
sometimes singly. They run right up the esk and die away in the curve of the valley. To
my left the view is cut off by a black line of roof of the old house next to the abbey.
The sheep and lambs are bleating in the fields away behind me, and there is a clatter of
donkeys' hooves up the paved road below. The band on the pier is playing a harsh waltz
in good time, and farther along the quay there is a Salvation Army meeting in the back street.
Neither of the bands hears the other, but up here I hear and see them both. I wonder
where Jonathan is, and if he is thinking of me. Oh, I wish he were here.'
5 June.
The case of Renfield grows more interesting the more I get to understand the man. He has
certain qualities very largely developed—selfishness, secrecy, and purpose. I wish I could get at
what is the object of the latter. He seems to have some settled scheme of his own, but
what it is I do not know. His redeeming quality is a love of animals, though, indeed, he has
such curious turns in it that I sometimes imagine he is only abnormally cruel. His pets
are of odd sorts. Just now his hobby is catching flies. He has at present such a quantity that
I have had myself to expostulate. To my astonishment he did not break out into a fury, as I expected,
but took the matter in simple seriousness. He thought for a moment and then said,
"'May I have three days? I shall clear them away.' Of course I said that would do. I must
watch him.'
18 June.
He has turned his mind now to spiders, and has got several very big fellows in a box.
He keeps feeding them his flies, and the number of the latter is becoming sensibly diminished,
although he has used half his food in attracting more flies from outside to his room.
1 July.
His spiders are now becoming as great a nuisance as his flies, and today I told him that he
must get rid of them. He looked very sad at this, so I said that he must, some of them,
at all events. He cheerfully acquiesced in this, and I gave him the same time as before
for reduction. He disgusted me much while with him, for when a hoarded blow-fly, bloated
with some carrion food, buzzed into the room, he caught it, held it exultantly for a few
moments between his finger and thumb, and before I knew what he was going to do, put
it in his mouth and ate it. I scolded him for it, but he argued quietly that it was
very good and very wholesome, that it was life, strong life, and gave life to him. This
gave me an idea, or the rudiment of one. I must watch how he gets rid of his spiders.
He has evidently some deep problem in his mind, for he keeps a little notebook in which
he is always jotting down something. Whole pages of it are filled with masses of figures,
generally single numbers added up in batches, and then the totals added in batches again,
as though he were focusing some account, as the auditors put it.
8 July.
There is a method in his madness, and the rudimentary idea in my mind is growing. It
will be a whole idea soon, and then, oh unconscious cerebration, you will have to give the wall
to your conscious brother. I kept away from my friend for a few days so that I might notice
if there were any change. Things remain as they were, except that he has parted with
some of his pets and got a new one. He has managed to get a sparrow, and has already
partially tamed it. His means of taming is simple, for already the spiders have diminished.
Those that do remain, however, are well fed, for he still brings in the flies by tempting
them with his food.
19 July.
We are progressing. My friend has now a whole colony of sparrows, and his flies and spiders
are almost obliterated. When I came in, he ran to me and said he wanted to ask me a great
favor, a very, very great favor, and as he spoke, he fawned on me like a dog. I asked
him what it was, and he said, with a sort of rapture in his voice and bearing, a kitten,
a nice little sleek, playful kitten, that I can play with and teach and feed and feed
and feed. I was not unprepared for this request, for I had noticed how his pets went on increasing
in size and vivacity, but I did not care that his pretty family of tamed sparrows should
be wiped out in the same manner as the flies and spiders. So I said I would see about it,
and asked him if he would not rather have a cat than a kitten. His eagerness betrayed
him as he answered, Oh, yes, I would like a cat. I only asked for a kitten lest you
should refuse me a cat. No one would refuse me a kitten, would they? I shook my head,
and said that at present I feared it would not be possible, but that I would see about
it. His face fell, and I could see a warning of danger in it, for there was a sudden fierce
sidelong look which meant killing. The man is an undeveloped homicidal maniac. I shall
test him with his present craving and see how it will work out, and then I shall know
more.
10 p.m. I visited him again and found him sitting in a corner brooding. When I came
again he threw himself on his knees before me and implored me to let him have a cat that
his salvation depended upon it. I was firm, however, and told him that he could not have
it, whereupon he went without a word and sat down gnawing his fingers in the corner where
I had found him. I shall see him in the morning early.
20 j. Visited Renfield very early before attendant went his rounds. Found him up and humming
a tune. He was spreading out his sugar, which he had saved, in the window, and was manifestly
beginning his fly-catching again, and beginning it cheerfully and with a good grace. I looked
around for his birds, and not seeing them, asked him where they were. He replied without
turning round that they had all flown away. There were a few feathers about the room,
and on his pillow a drop of blood. I said nothing, but went and told the keeper to report
to me if there were anything odd about him during the day.
11 a.m. The attendant has just been to see me to say that Renfield has been very sick
and has disgorged a whole lot of feathers. My belief is, doctor, he said, that he has
eaten his birds and that he just took and ate them raw.
11 p.m. I gave Renfield a strong opiate tonight, enough to make even him sleep, and took away
his pocket-book to look at it. The thought that has been buzzing about my brain lately
is complete, and the theory proved. My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind. I shall have
to invent a new classification for him and call him a Zufagous Life-Eating Maniac.
What he desires is to absorb as many lives as he can, and he has laid himself out to
achieve it in a cumulative way. He gave many flies to one spider, and many spiders to one
bird, and then wanted a cat to eat the many birds. What would have been his later steps?
It would almost be worthwhile to complete the experiment. It might be done if there
were only a sufficient cause. Men sneered at vivisection, and yet look at its results
today. Why not advance science in its most difficult and vital aspect, the knowledge
of the brain? Had I even the secret of one such mind, did I hold the key to the fancy
of even one lunatic, I might advance my own branch of science to a pitch compared with
which Burton Sanderson's physiology, or Faraday's brain knowledge, would be as nothing. If only
there were a sufficient cause, I must not think too much of this, or I may be tempted.
A good cause might turn the scale with me, for may not I too be of an exceptional brain
congenitally? How well the man reasoned. Lunatics always do within their own scope.
I wonder at how many lives he values a man, or if at only one. He has closed the account
most accurately, and today begun a new record. How many of us begin a new record with each
day of our lives? To me it seems only yesterday that my whole life ended with my new hope,
and that truly I began a new record. So it shall be until the great recorder sums me
up and closes my ledger account with a balance to profit or loss.
Ah, Lucy, Lucy, I cannot be angry with you, nor can I be angry with my friend whose happiness
is yours, but I must only wait on hopeless and work, work, work. If I could have as strong
a cause as my poor mad friend there, a good unselfish cause to make me work, that would
be indeed happiness.
Mina Murray's Journal
26th of July. I am anxious and it soothes me to express myself here. It is like whispering
to oneself and listening at the same time. And there is also something about the shorthand
symbols that makes it different from writing.
I am unhappy about Lucy and about Jonathan. I had not heard from Jonathan for some time
and was very concerned, but yesterday dear Mr. Hawkins, who is always so kind, sent me
a letter from him. I had written asking him if he had heard, and he said the enclosed
had just been received. It is only a line dated from Castle Dracula and says that he
is just starting for home. That is not like Jonathan. I do not understand it and it makes
me uneasy.
Then too Lucy, although she is so well, has lately taken to her old habit of walking in
her sleep. Her mother has spoken to me about it, and we have decided that I am to lock
the door of our room every night. Mrs. Westlenra has got an idea that sleepwalkers always go
out on roofs of houses and along the edges of cliffs and then get suddenly wakened and
fall over with a despairing cry that echoes all over the place. Poor dear! She is naturally
anxious about Lucy and she tells me that her husband, Lucy's father, had the same habit,
that he would get up in the night and dress himself and go out if he were not stopped.
Lucy is to be married in the autumn, and she is already planning out her dresses and how
house is to be arranged. I sympathize with her, for I do the same. Only Jonathan and
I will start in life in a very simple way, and shall have to try to make both ends meet.
Mr. Homewood, he is the honorable Arthur Homewood, only son of Lord Godalming, is coming up here
very shortly, as soon as he can leave town, for his father is not very well, and I think
dear Lucy is counting the moments till he comes. She wants to take him up in the seat
of the churchyard cliff and show him the beauty of Whitby. I dare say it is the waiting which
disturbs her. She will be all right when he arrives.
27th of July. No news from Jonathan. I am getting quite uneasy about him, though why
I should I do not know, but I do wish that he would write, if it were only a single line.
Lucy walks more than ever, and each night I am awakened by her moving about the room.
Fortunately, the weather is so hot that she cannot get cold. But still, the anxiety and
the perpetually being awakened is beginning to tell on me, and I am getting nervous and
wakeful myself. Thank God Lucy's health keeps up. Mr. Homewood has been suddenly called
to ring to see his father, who has been taken seriously ill. Lucy frets at the postponement
of seeing him, but it does not touch her looks. She is a trifle stouter, and her cheeks are
lovely rose pink. She has lost the anemic look which she had. I pray it will all last.
3rd of August. Another week gone by, and no news from Jonathan. Not even to Mr. Hawkins,
from whom I have heard. Oh, I do hope he is not ill. He surely would have written. I look
at that last letter of his, but somehow it does not satisfy me. It does not read like
him, and yet it is his writing. There is no mistake of that.
Lucy has not walked much in her sleep the last week, but there is an odd concentration
about her which I do not understand. Even in her sleep she seems to be watching me.
She tries the door, and finding it locked, goes about the room, searching for the key.
6th of August. Another three days, and no news. The suspense is getting dreadful. If
I only knew where to write to or where to go to, I should feel easier. But no one has
heard a word of Jonathan since that last letter. I must only pray to God for patience.
Lucy is more excitable than ever, but is otherwise well. Last night was very threatening, and
the fishermen say that we are in for a storm. I must try to watch it, and learn the weather
signs.
Today is a gray day, and the sun as I write is hidden in thick clouds high over Kettleness.
Everything is gray, except the green grass which seems like emerald amongst it, gray
earthy rock, gray clouds, tinged with a sunburst at the far edge, hang over the gray sea in
which the sand points stretch like gray figures. The sea is tumbling in over the shallows in
the sandy flats with a roar, muffled in sea mists drifting inland. The horizon is lost
in a gray mist. All vastness, the clouds are piled up like giant rocks, and there is a
brule over the sea that sounds like some passage of doom. Dark figures are on the beach here
and there, sometimes half-shrouded in the mist, and seem men-like trees walking. The fishing boats are racing for home, and rise and dip in the ground swell as they sweep into the harbor, bending to the scuppers. Here comes old Mr. Swales. He is making straight for me, and I can see by the way he lifts his hat that he wants to talk. I have been quite touched by the change in the poor old man. When he sat down beside me, he said in a very gentle way, I want to say something to you, miss.
I could see that he was not at ease, so I took his poor old wrinkled hand in mine and asked him to speak fully. So he said, leaving his hand in mine, I am afraid, my dearie, that I must have shocked you by all the wicked things I have been saying about the dead and such-like for weeks past, but I didn't mean them, and I want you to remember that when I am gone. We old folks that be daffled, with one foot above the crock-hole, don't all together like to think of it, and we don't want to feel scared of it, and that's why I took to making light
of it, so that I would cheer up my own heart a bit. But, Lord, love you, miss, I ain't afraid of dying, not a bit, only I don't want to die if I can help it. My time must be nigh at hand now, for I be old, and a hundred years is too much for any man to expect. And I am so nigh at that the old man has already witnessed life. You see, I can't get out of the habit of coughing about it all at once. The chaffs will wag as they be used to.
Ah, some day soon the angel of death will sound his trumpet for me. But don't you dull and grate, my dearie, for he saw that I was crying. If he should come this very night, I'd not refuse to answer his call. For life be after all, only awaiting for something else than what we're doing, and death be all that we can rightly depend on.
But I'm content, for it's coming to me, my dearie, and coming quick. It may be coming while we be looking and wondering. Maybe it's in that wind out over the sea that's pringing with it loss and wreck and sore distress and sad hearts.
Look, look! he cried suddenly. There's something in that wind and in the host beyond that sound, and looks and tastes and smells like death.
It's in the air. I feel it coming.
Ah, Lord, make me answer cheerful when my call comes.
He held up his arms devoutly and raised his hat. His mouth moved as though he were praying.
After a few minutes' silence he got up, shook hands with me, and blessed me, and said good-bye, and hobbled off. It all touched me and upset me very much.
I was glad when the Coast Guard came along with his spy-glass under his arm. He stopped to talk with me, as he always does, but all the time kept looking at a strange ship.
I can't make her out, he said.
She's a Russian by the look of her. Ah, but she's knocking about in the queerest way.
She doesn't know her mind a bit. She seems to see the storm coming, but can't decide whether to run up north in the open or to put in here.
Look there again. She's steered mighty strangely, for she doesn't mind the hand on the wheel, changes about with every puff of wind.
Ah, we'll hear more of her before this time tomorrow.
Cutting from The Daily Graph, 8th of August, pasted in Mina Murray's journal.
From a Correspondent, Whitby.
One of the greatest and suddenest storms on record has just been experienced here with
results both strange and unique.
The weather had been somewhat sultry, but not to any degree uncommon in the month of August.
Saturday evening was as fine as was ever known, and the great body of holiday-makers laid
out yesterday for visits to Mulgrave Woods, Robin Hood's Bay, Rig Mill, Runswick, States,
and the various trips in the neighborhood of Whitby.
The steamers Emma and Scarborough made trips up and down the coast, and there was an unusual
amount of tripping both to and from Whitby.
The day was unusually fine till the afternoon when some of the gossips who frequent the
east cliff churchyard and from the commanding eminence watch the wide sweep of sea visible
to the north and east, called attention to a sudden show of mare's tails high in the
sky to the northwest.
The wind was then blowing from the southwest in the mild degree which in barometrical
language is ranked as number two light breeze.
The Coast Guard on duty at once made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than half
century has kept watch on weather signs from the east cliff, foretold in an emphatic manner
the coming of a sudden storm.
The approach of sunset was so very beautiful, so grand in its masses of splendidly colored
clouds that there was quite an assemblage on the walk along the cliff in the old churchyard
to enjoy the beauty.
Before the sun dipped below the black mass of kettleness, standing boldly a thwart the
western sky, its downward way was marked by myriad clouds of every sunset color, flame,
purple, pink, green, violet, and all the tints of gold, with here and there masses not large,
but of seemingly absolute blackness in all sorts of shapes, as well outlined as colossal
silhouettes.
The experience was not lost on the painters, and doubtless some of the sketches of the
prelude to the great storm will grace the R.A. and R.I. walls in May next.
More than one captain made up his mind then and there that his cobble, or his mule, as
they term the different classes of boats, would remain in the harbor till the storm
had passed.
The wind fell away entirely during the evening, and at midnight there was a dead calm, a sultry
heat, and that prevailing intensity which, on the approach of thunder, affects persons
of a sensitive nature.
There were but few lights in sight at sea, for even the coasting steamers, which usually
the shore so closely, kept well to seaward, and but a few fishing boats were in sight.
The only sail noticeable was a foreign schooner with all sails set, which was seemingly going
westwards.
The foolhardiness or ignorance of her officers was a prolific theme for comment whilst she
remained in sight, and efforts were made to signal her to reduce sail in the face of her
danger.
Before the night shut down she was seen with sails idly flapping as she gently rolled on
the undulating swell of the sea, as idle as a painted ship upon a painted ocean.
Shortly before ten o'clock the stillness of the air grew quite oppressive, and the silence
was so marked that the bleating of a sheep inland or the barking of a dog in the town
was distinctly heard, and the band on the pier, with its lively French air, was like
a discord in the great harmony of nature's silence.
A little after midnight came a strange sound from over the sea, and high overhead the air
began to carry a strange faint hollow booming.
Then, without warning, the tempest broke, with a rapidity which at the time seemed incredible,
and even afterwards is impossible to realize, the whole aspect of nature at once becoming
convulsed.
The waves rose in growing fury, each overtopping its fellow, till, in a very few minutes, the
sea was like a roaring and devouring monster.
White crested waves beat madly on the level sands and rushed up the shelving cliffs.
Others broke over the piers, and with their spewms swept the lanthorns of the lighthouse,
which rise from the end of either pier of Whitby Harbour.
The wind roared like thunder, and blew with such force that it was with difficulty that
even strong men kept their feet, or clung with grim clasp to the iron stanchions.
It was found necessary to clear the entire pier from the mass of onlookers, or else the
fatalities of the night would have increased manifold.
To add to the difficulties and dangers of the time, masses of sea-fog came drifting
inland.
White, wet clouds, which swept by in ghostly fashion, so dank and damp and cold that it
needed but a little effort of imagination to think that the spirits of those lost at
were touching their living brethren with the clammy hands of death, and many a one shuddered
as the wreaths of sea-mist swept by.
At times the mist cleared, and the sea, for some distance, could be seen in the glare
of the lightning, which came thick and fast, followed by such peals of thunder that the
whole sky overhead seemed trembling under the shock of the footsteps of the storm.
Some of the scenes thus revealed were of immeasurable grandeur and of absorbing interest.
The sea, running mountains high, threw skywards with each wave mighty masses of white foam,
which the tempest seemed to snatch at and whirl away into space.
Here and there a fishing-boat with a rag of sail running madly for shelter before the
blast, now and again the white wings of a storm-tossed sea-bird.
On the summit of the east cliff the new search-light was ready for experiment, but had not yet
been tried.
The officers in charge of it got it into working order, and in the pauses of onrushing mist
swept with it the surface of the sea.
Once or twice its service was most effective, as when a fishing-boat with gunnel under water
rushed into the harbor, able, by the guidance of the sheltering light, to avoid the danger
of dashing against the piers.
As each boat achieved the safety of the port there was a shout of joy from the mass of
people on the shore, a shout which for a moment seemed to cleave the gale and was then swept
away in its rush.
Before long the search-light discovered some distance away a schooner, with all sails set,
apparently the same vessel which had been noticed earlier in the evening.
The wind had by this time backed to the east, and there was a shudder amongst the watchers
on the cliff as they realized the terrible danger in which she now was.
Between her and the port lay the great flat reef on which so many good ships have from
time to time suffered, and with the wind blowing from its present quarter it would be quite
impossible that she should fetch the entrance of the harbor.
It was now nearly the hour of high tide, but the waves were so great that in their troughs
the shallows of the shore were almost visible, and the schooner with all sails set was rushing
with such speed that, in the words of one old salt, she must fetch up somewhere if it
was only in hell.
Then came another rush of sea-fog, greater than any hitherto, a mass of dank mist which
seemed to close on all things like a gray pall, and left available to men only the organ
of hearing, for the roar of the tempest and the crash of the thunder and the booming of
the mighty billows came through the damp oblivion even louder than before.
The rays of the search-light were kept fixed on the harbor mouth across the east pier,
where the shock was expected, and the men waited breathless.
The wind suddenly shifted to the northeast, and the remnant of the sea-fog melted in the
blast, and then Mirebiel Dictu swept the strange schooner before the blast with all sails set
and gained the safety of the harbor.
The search-light followed her, and a shudder ran through all who saw her, for lashed to
the helm was a corpse, with drooping head, which swung horribly to and fro at each motion
of the ship.
No other form could be seen on the deck at all.
A great awe came on all as they realized that the ship as if by a miracle had found the
harbor unsteered save by the hand of a dead man.
However, all took place more quickly than it takes to write these words.
The schooner paused not, but, rushing across the harbor, pitched herself on that accumulation
of sand and gravel washed by many tides and many storms, into the southeast corner of
the pier jutting under the east cliff, known locally as Tate Hill Pier.
There was, of course, a considerable concussion as the vessel drove up on the sand-heap.
Every spar, rope, and stay was strained, and some of the top-hammer came crashing down,
but strangest of all, the very instant the shore was touched an immense dog sprang up
on deck from below as if shot up by the concussion, and running forward jumped from the bow on
the sand, making straight for the steep cliff where the churchyard hangs over the laneway
to the east pier so steeply that some of the flat tombstones, thruff-steens or through-stones
as they call them in the Whitby vernacular, actually project over where the sustaining
cliff has fallen away.
It disappeared in the darkness, which seemed intensified just beyond the focus of the search-light.
It so happened that there was no one at the moment on Tate Hill Pier, as all those whose
houses are in close proximity were either in bed or were out on the heights above.
Thus the Coast Guard on duty on the eastern side of the harbor, who at once ran down to
the little pier, was the first to climb aboard.
The men working the search-light after scouring the entrance of the harbor without seeing
anything, then turned the light on the derelict and kept it there.
The Coast Guard ran aft, and when he came beside the wheel bent over to examine it,
and recoiled at once as though under some sudden emotion.
This seemed to pique general curiosity, and quite a number of people began to run.
It was a good way round from the west cliff by the drawbridge to Tate Hill Pier, but your
correspondent is a fairly good runner, and came well ahead of the crowd.
When I arrived, however, I found already assembled on the pier a crowd, whom the Coast Guard
and police refused to allow to come on board.
By the courtesy of the Chief Boatman, I was, as your correspondent, permitted to climb
on deck, and was one of a small group who saw the dead seaman whilst actually lashed
to the wheel.
It was no wonder that the Coast Guard was surprised, or even awed, for not often can
such a sight have been seen.
The man was simply fastened by his hands, tied one over the other, to a spoke of the
wheel.
Between the inner hand and the wood was a crucifix, the set of beads on which it was
fastened being around both wrists and wheel, and all kept fast by the binding cords.
The poor fellow may have been seated at one time, but the flapping and buffeting of the
sails had worked through the rudder of the wheel, and had dragged him to and fro, so
that the cords with which he was tied had cut the flesh to the bone.
Accurate note was made of the state of things in a doctor, Surgeon J. M. Caffin of 33 East
place, who came immediately after me, declared after making examination that the man must
have been dead for quite two days.
In his pocket was a bottle, carefully corked, empty save for a little roll of paper, which
proved to be the addendum to the log.
The Coast Guard said the man must have tied up his own hands, fastening the knots with
his teeth.
The fact that a Coast Guard was the first on board may save some complications later
on in the Admiralty Court, for Coast Guards cannot claim the salvage which is the right
of the first civilian entering on a derelict.
Already however the legal tongues are wagging, and one young law student is loudly asserting
that the rights of the owner are already completely sacrificed, his property being held in contravention
of the statutes of Mort Main, since the tiller, as emblemship, if not proof, of delegated
possession, is held in a dead hand.
It is needless to say that the dead steersman has been reverently removed from the place
where he held his honorable watch and ward till death, a steadfastness as noble as that
of the young Casabianca, and placed in the mortuary to await inquest.
Already the sudden storm is passing, and its fierceness is abating, crowds are scattering
backward and the sky is beginning to redden over the Yorkshire wolds.
I shall send, in time for your next issue, further details of the derelict ship which
her way so miraculously into harbor in the storm.
The sequel to the strange arrival of the derelict in the storm last night is almost more startling
than the thing itself.
It turns out that the schooner is Russian from Varna, and is called the Demeter.
She is also entirely imbalanced of silver sand, with only a small amount of cargo, a
number of great wooden box, filled with mold.
This cargo was consigned to a Whitby solicitor, Mr. S. F. Billington, of Seven the Crescent,
who this morning went aboard and took formal possession of the goods consigned to him.
The Russian consul, too, acting for the Charter Party, took formal possession of the ship,
and paid all harbor dues, etc.
Nothing is talked about here today except the strange coincidence.
The officials of the Board of Trade have been most exacting in seeing that every compliance
has been made with existing regulations.
As the matter is to be a nine days' wonder, they are evidently determined that there shall
be no cause of other complaint.
A good deal of interest was abroad concerning the dog which landed when the ship struck,
and more than a few of the members of the SPCA, which is very strong in Whitby, have
tried to befriend the animal.
To the general disappointment, however, it was not to be found.
It seems to have disappeared entirely from the town.
It may be that it was frightened, and made its way on to the moors, where it is still
hiding in terror.
There are some who look with dread on such a possibility, lest later on it should in
itself become a danger, for it is evidently a fierce brute.
Early this morning a large dog, a half-bred mastiff belonging to a coal merchant close
to Tate Hill Pier, was found dead in the roadway opposite its master's yard.
It had been fighting, and manifestly had had a savage opponent, for its throat was torn
away, and its belly was slit open as if with a savage claw.
Later.
By the kindness of the board of trade inspector I have been permitted to look over the logbook
of the demeter, which was in order up to within three days, but contained nothing of special
interest except as to facts of missing men.
The greatest interest, however, is with regard to the paper found in the bottle which was
today produced at the inquest, and a more strange narrative than the two between them
unfold, and has not been my lot to come across.
As there is no motive for concealment I am permitted to use them, and accordingly send
you a transcript, simply omitting technical details of seamanship and supercargo.
It almost seems as though the captain had been seized with some kind of mania before
he had got well into blue water, and that this had developed persistently throughout
the voyage.
Of course, my statement must be taken cum grano, since I am writing from the dictation
of a clerk of the Russian Council, who kindly translated for me, time being short.
Log of the Demeter, Varna to Whitby.
Written 18th of July.
Things so strange happening that I shall keep accurate note henceforth till we land.
On 6th July we finish taking in cargo, silver sand and boxes of earth.
At noon set sail.
East wind fresh, crew five hands, two mates cook, and myself captain.
On 11th July, at dawn entered Bosphorus, boarded by Turkish customs officers, Bakshish, all
correct, under way at 4 p.m.
On 12th July, through Dardanelles, more customs officers and flag-boat of guarding squadron,
Bakshish again, work of officers thorough but quick, want us off soon.
At dark passed into Archipelago.
On 13th July passed Cape Matapin.
Crew dissatisfied about something, seemed scared, but would not speak out.
On 14th July was somewhat anxious about crew.
Men, all steady fellows who sailed with me before, mate could not make out what was wrong.
They only told him there was something, and crossed themselves.
Mate lost temper with one of them that day and struck him.
Expected fierce quarrel, but all was quiet.
On 16th July, mate reported in the morning that one of the crew, Petrovsky, was missing,
could not account for it.
Took-larbered watch eight bells last night, was relieved by Amramov, but did not go to
bunk.
Men, more downcast than ever, all said they expected something of the kind, but would
not say more than there was something aboard.
Mate getting very impatient with them, feared some trouble ahead.
On 17th July, yesterday, one of the men, Olgaren, came to my cabin, and in an awe-struck way
confided to me that he thought there was a strange man aboard the ship.
He said that in his watch he had been sheltering behind the deck-house, as there was a rainstorm,
when he saw a tall, thin man who was not like any of the crew come up the companion-way
and go along the deck forward and disappear.
He followed cautiously, but when he got to bows found no one, and the hatchways were
all closed.
He was in a panic of superstitious fear, and I am afraid the panic may spread.
To allay it, I shall today search the entire ship carefully from stem to stern.
Later in the day I got together the whole crew and told them, as they evidently thought
there was some one in the ship, we would search from stem to stern.
First mate angry said it was folly, and to yield to such foolish ideas would demoralize
the men.
Said he would engage to keep them out of trouble with the hand-spike.
I let him take the helm, while the rest began a thorough search, all keeping abreast with
lanterns.
We left no corner unsearched.
As there were only the big wooden boxes there were no odd corners where a man could hide.
Men much relieved went search over, and went back to work cheerfully.
First mate scowled, but said nothing.
22 July.
Rough weather lasts three days and all hands busy with sails, no time to be frightened.
Men seem to have forgotten their dread.
Mate cheerful again, and all on good terms, praised men for work and bad weather, past
Gibraltar and out through Straits.
All well.
24 July.
There seems some doom over this ship.
Already a hand short and entering the Bay of Biscay with wild weather ahead, and yet
Last night another man lost, disappeared, like the first.
He came off his watch and was not seen again.
Men all in a panic of fear, sent a round robin asking to have double watch, as they fear
to be alone.
Mate angry, fear there will be some trouble, as either he or the men will do some violence.
28 July.
Four days in hell, knocking about in a sort of maelstrom, and the wind a tempest, no sleep
for anyone, men all worn out.
Hardly know how to set a watch since no one fit to go on.
Second mate volunteered to steer and watch, and let men snatch a few hours' sleep.
Wind abating, seas still terrific, but feel them less.
A ship is steadier.
29 July.
Another tragedy.
Had single watch to-night as crew too tired to double.
When morning watch came on deck could find no one except steersman.
Raised outcry and all came on deck, thorough search, but no one was found.
Are now without second mate, and crew in a panic.
Mate and I agreed to go armed henceforth and wait for any sign of cause.
30 July.
Last night.
Rejoiced we are nearing England, weather fine, all sails set.
Retired, worn out, slept soundly, awakened by mate telling me that both men of watch
and steersman missing.
Only self and mate and two hands left to work ship.
One August.
Two days of fog, and not a sail sighted.
Had hoped when in the English Channel to be able to signal for help or get in somewhere.
Not having power to work sails, have to run before wind.
Dare not lower, as could not raise them again.
We seem to be drifting to some terrible doom.
Mate now more demoralized than either of men.
His stronger nature seems to have worked inwardly against himself.
Men are beyond fear, working stolidly and patiently with minds made up to worst.
They are Russian.
Heave Romanian.
Two August.
Midnight.
Woke up from few minutes' sleep by hearing a cry, seemingly outside my port.
Could see nothing in fog, rushed on deck and ran against mate.
Tells me he heard cry and ran, but no sign of man on watch.
One more gone.
Lord, help us.
Mate says we must be past Straits of Dover, as in a moment of fog lifting we saw north
foreland, just as he heard the man cry out.
If so, we are now off in the North Sea, and only God can guide us in the fog, which seems
to move with us, and God seems to have deserted us.
Three August.
At midnight I went to relieve the man at the wheel, and when I got to it found no one there.
The wind was steady, and as we ran before it there was no yawing.
I dared not leave it, so shouted for the mate.
After a few seconds he rushed up on deck in his flannels.
He looked wild-eyed and haggard, and I greatly fear his reason has given way.
He came close to me, and he whispered hoarsely with his mouth to my ear, as though fearing
the very air might hear.
It is here.
I know it now.
On the watch last night I saw it.
Like a man, tall and thin and ghastly pale, it was in the boughs and looking out.
I crept behind it and gave it my knife, but the knife went through it, empty as the air.
And as he spoke he took the knife and drove it savagely into space, then he went on.
But it is here, and I'll find it.
It is in the hold, perhaps in one of those boxes.
I'll unscrew them one by one and see you work the helm.
And with a warning look and his finger on his lip he went below.
There was springing up a choppy wind, and I could not leave the helm.
I saw him come out on deck again with a tool-chest and lantern, and go down the forward hatchway.
He's mad, stark, raving, mad, and it's no use my trying to stop him.
He can't hurt those big boxes, they are invoiced as clay, and to pull them about is as harmless
a thing as he can do.
So here I stay and mind the helm and write these notes.
I can only trust in God and wait till the fog clears.
Then, if I can't steer to any harbor with the wind that is, I shall cut down sails and
lie by and signal for help.
It is nearly all over now.
Just as I was beginning to hope that the mate would come out calmer, for I heard him knocking
away at something in the hold, and work is good for him, there came up the hatchway a
sudden, startled scream which made my blood run cold, and up on the deck he came as if
shot from a gun, a raging madman with his eyes rolling and his face convulsed with fear.
Save me, save me, he cried, and then looked round on the blanket of fog.
His horror turned to despair, and in a steady voice he said, You had better come too, captain,
before it is too late.
He is there.
I know the secret now.
The sea will save me from him, and it is all that is left.
Before I could say a word or move forward to seize him, he sprang on the bulwark and
deliberately threw himself into the sea.
I suppose I know the secret too now.
It was this madman who had got rid of the men one by one, and now he has followed them
himself.
God help me!
How am I to account for all these horrors when I get to port?
When I get to port, will that ever be?
4 August.
Still fog, which the sunrise cannot pierce.
I know there is sunrise, because I am a sailor.
Why else I know not?
I dared not go below.
I dared not leave the helm, so here all night I stayed, and in the dimness of night I saw
it.
Him.
God forgive me, but the mate was right to jump overboard.
It was better to die like a man, to die like a sailor in blue water no man can object.
But I am captain, and I must not leave my ship.
But I shall baffle this fiend or monster, for I shall tie my hands to the wheel when
my strength begins to fail, and along with them I shall tie that which he, it, dare not
touch.
And then, come good wind or foul, I shall save my soul, and my honor as captain.
I am growing weaker, and the night is coming on.
If he can look me in the face again, I may not have time to act.
If we are wrecked, mayhap this bottle may be found, and those who find it may understand.
If not, well, then all men shall know that I have been true to my trust.
God and the Blessed Virgin and the Saints help a poor ignorant soul trying to do his
duty.
Of course the verdict was an open one.
There is no evidence to adduce, and whether or not the man himself committed the murders
there is now none to say.
The folk here hold almost universally that the captain is simply a hero, and he is to
be given a public funeral.
Already it is arranged that his body is to be taken with a train of boats up the Esk
for a piece, and then brought back to Tate Hill Pier and up the Abbey Steps, for he is
to be buried in the churchyard on the cliff.
The owners of more than a hundred boats have already given in their names as wishing to
follow him to the grave.
No trace has ever been found of the great dog, at which there is much mourning, for,
with public opinion in its present state, he would, I believe, be adopted by the town.
Tomorrow we'll see the funeral, and so will end this one more Mystery of the Sea.
Mina Murray's Journal 8 August
Lucy was very restless all night, and I too could not sleep.
The storm was fearful, and as it boomed loudly among the chimney-pots it made me shudder.
When a sharp puff came it seemed to be like a distant gun.
Strangely enough Lucy did not wake, but she got up twice and dressed herself.
Fortunately each time I awoke in time and managed to undress her without waking her,
got her back to bed.
It is a very strange thing, this sleep-walking, for as soon as her will is thwarted in any
physical way, her intention, if there be any, disappears, and she yields herself almost
exactly to the routine of her life.
Early in the morning we both got up and went down to the harbor to see if anything had
happened in the night.
There were very few people about, and though the sun was bright and the air clear and fresh,
the big grim-looking waves that seemed dark themselves, because the foam that topped them
was like snow, forced themselves in through the mouth of the harbor, like a bullying man
going through a crowd.
Somehow I felt glad that Jonathan was not on the sea last night, but on land.
But, oh, is he on land or sea?
Where is he?
And how?
I am getting fearfully anxious about him, if I only knew what to do, and could do anything.
10 August
The funeral of the poor sea-captain today was most touching.
Every boat in the harbor seemed to be there, and the coffin was carried by captains all
the way from Tate Hill Pier up to the churchyard.
Lucy came with me, and we went early to our old seat, whilst the cortege of boats went
up the river to the viaduct and came down again.
We had a lovely view and saw the procession nearly all the way.
The poor fellow was laid to rest near our seat, so that we stood on it when the time
came and saw everything.
Poor Lucy seemed much upset.
She was restless and uneasy all the time, and I cannot but think that her dreaming at
night is telling on her.
She is quite odd in one thing.
She will not admit to me that there is any cause for restlessness, or if there be, she
does not understand it herself.
There is an additional cause, in that poor Mr. Swales was found dead this morning on
our seat, his neck being broken.
He had evidently, as the doctor said, fallen back in the seat in some sort of fright, for
there was a look of fear and horror on his face that the men said made them shudder.
Poor dear old man.
Lucy is so sweet and sensitive that she feels influences more acutely than other people
do.
Just now she was quite upset by a little thing which I did not much heed, though I am myself
very fond of animals.
One of the men who came up here often to look for the boats was followed by his dog.
The dog is always with him.
They are both quiet persons, and I never saw the man angry nor heard the dog bark.
During the service the dog would not come to its master, who was on the seat with us,
but kept a few yards off barking and howling.
Its master spoke to it gently, and then harshly, and then angrily, but it would neither come
nor cease to make a noise.
It was in a fury, with its eyes savage and all its hair bristling out like a cat's tail
when puss is on the war path.
Finally the man, too, got angry, and jumped down and kicked the dog, and then took it
by the strough of the neck, and half dragged and half threw it on the tombstone on which
the seat is fixed.
The moment it touched the stone the poor thing began to tremble.
It did not try to get away, but crouched down, quivering and cowering, and was in such a
pitiable state of terror that I tried, though without effect, to comfort it.
Lucy was full of pity, too, but she did not attempt to touch the dog, but looked at it
in an agonized sort of way.
I greatly fear that she is of too supersensitive a nature to go through the world without trouble.
She will be dreaming of this to-night, I am sure.
The whole agglomeration of things, the ship steered into port by a dead man, his attitude
tied to the wheel with a crucifix and beads, the touching funeral, the dog, now furious
and now in terror, will all afford material for her dreams.
I think it will be best for her to go to bed tired out physically, so I shall take her
for a long walk by the cliffs to Robin Hood's Bay and back.
She ought not to have much inclination for sleep-walking then.
Same day.
Eleven o'clock p.m.
Oh, but I am tired.
If it were not that I had made my diary a duty, I could not open it tonight.
We had a lovely walk.
Lucy, after a while, was in gay spirits, owing, I think, to some dear cows who came nosing
towards us in a field close to the lighthouse, and frightened the wits out of us.
I believe we forgot everything, except, of course, personal fear.
And it seemed to wipe the slate clean and give us a fresh start.
We had a capital severe tea at Robin Hood's Bay, in a sweet little old-fashioned inn,
with a bow-window right over the seaweed-covered rocks of the Strand.
I believe we should have shocked the new woman with our appetites.
Men are more tolerant, bless them.
Then we walked home with some, or rather many, stoppages to rest,
and with our hearts full of constant dread of wild bulls.
Lucy was really tired, and we intended to creep off to bed as soon as we could.
The young curate came in, however, and Mrs. Westenra asked him to stay for supper.
Lucy and I both had a fight for it with the dusty miller.
I know it was a hard fight on my part, and I am quite heroic.
I think that some day the bishops must get together,
and see about breeding up a new class of curates,
who don't take supper, no matter how hard they may be pressed to,
and who will know when girls are tired.
Lucy is asleep and breathing softly.
She has more color in her cheeks than usual, and looks oh so sweet.
If Mr. Homewood fell in love with her, seeing her only in the drawing-room,
I wonder what he would say if he saw her now.
Some of the new women writers will some day start an idea
that men and women should be allowed to see each other asleep before proposing or accepting.
But I suppose the new woman wouldn't condescend in future to accept.
She will do the proposing herself, and a nice job she will make of it too.
There's some consolation in that.
I am happy tonight, because dear Lucy seems better.
I really believe she has turned the corner,
and that we are over her troubles with dreaming.
I should be quite happy if only I knew of Jonathan.
God bless and keep him.
11th August. Diary again.
No sleep now, so I may as well write.
I am too agitated to sleep.
We have had such an adventure, such an agonizing experience.
I fell asleep as soon as I had closed my diary.
Suddenly, I became broad awake and sat up, with a horrible sense of fear upon me,
and of some feeling of emptiness around me.
The room was dark, so I could not see Lucy's bed.
I stole a cross and felt for her. The bed was empty.
I lit a match and found that she was not in the room.
The door was shut, but not locked as I had left it.
I feared to wake her mother, who has been more than usually ill lately,
so threw on some clothes and got ready to look for her.
As I was leaving the room, it struck me that the clothes she wore
might give me some clue to her dreaming intention.
Dressing gown would mean house, dress outside.
Dressing gown and dress were both in their places.
Thank God, I said to myself, she cannot be far as she is only in her night dress.
I ran downstairs and looked in the sitting room, not there.
Then I looked in all the other rooms of the house,
with an ever-growing fear chilling my heart.
Finally, I came to the hall door and found it open.
It was not wide open, but the catch of the lock had not caught.
The people of the house are careful to lock the door every night,
so I feared that Lucy must have gone out as she was.
There was no time to think of what might happen.
A vague, overmastering fear obscured all details.
I took a big heavy shawl and ran out.
The clock was striking one as I was in the crescent,
and there was not a soul in sight.
I ran along the north terrace,
but could see no sign of the white figure which I expected.
At the edge of the west cliff above the pier,
I looked across the harbor to the east cliff,
in the hope or fear, I don't know which,
of seeing Lucy in our favorite seat.
There was a bright, full moon,
with heavy black, driving clouds,
which threw the whole scene into a fleeting diorama
of light and shade as they sailed across.
For a moment or two, I could see nothing,
as the shadow of a cloud obscured St. Mary's Church and all around it.
Then, as the cloud passed,
I could see the ruins of the abbey coming into view,
and as the edge of a narrow band of light,
as sharp as a sword cut moved along,
the church and churchyard became gradually visible.
Whatever my expectation was, it was not disappointed,
for there, on our favorite seat,
the silver light of the moon struck a half-reclining figure,
snowy white.
The coming of the cloud was too quick for me to see much,
for the shadow shut down on the light almost immediately.
But it seemed to me as if something dark stood behind the seat
where the white figure shone and bent over it.
What it was, whether man or beast, I could not tell.
I did not wait to catch another glance,
but flew down the steep steps to the pier
and along by the fish market to the bridge,
which was the only way to reach the east cliff.
The town seemed as dead, for not a soul that I see.
I rejoiced that it was so,
for I wanted no witness of poor Lucy's condition.
The time and distance seemed endless,
and my knees trembled and my breath came labored
as I toiled up the endless steps to the abbey.
I must have gone fast,
and yet it seemed to me as if my feet were weighted with lead,
and as though every joint in my body were rusty.
When I got almost to the top,
I could see the seat and the white figure,
for I was now close enough to distinguish it
even through the spells of shadow.
There was undoubtedly something, long and black,
bending over the half-reclining white figure.
I called in fright,
Lucy, Lucy!
and something raised ahead,
and from where I was I could see a white face
and red gleaming eyes.
Lucy did not answer,
and I ran onto the entrance of the churchyard.
As I entered, the church was between me and the seat,
and for a minute or so I lost sight of her.
When I came in the view again, the cloud had passed,
and the moonlight struck so brilliantly
that I could see Lucy half-reclining
with her head lying over the back of the seat.
She was quite alone,
and there was not a sign of any living thing about.
When I bent over her,
I could see that she was still asleep.
Her lips were parted,
and she was breathing,
not softly as usual with her,
but in long, heavy gasps,
as though striving to get her lungs full at every breath.
As I came close,
she put up her hand in her sleep
and pulled the collar of her nightdress close about her,
as though she felt the cold.
I flung the warm shawl over her,
and drew the edges tight around her neck,
for I dreaded lest she get some deadly chill from the night air,
unclad as she was.
I feared to wake her all at once,
so, in order to have my hands free to help her,
I fastened the shawl at her throat with a big safety pin.
But I must have been clumsy in my anxiety
and pinched or pricked her with it,
for by and by, when her breathing became quieter,
she put her hand to her throat again and moaned.
When I had her carefully wrapped up,
I put my shoes on her feet
and then began very gently to wake her.
At first, she did not respond,
but gradually she became more and more uneasy in her sleep,
moaning and sighing occasionally.
At last, as time was passing fast,
and for many other reasons,
I wished to get her home at once,
I shook her forcibly,
till finally she opened her eyes and awoke.
She did not seem surprised to see me,
as, of course, she did not realize all at once where she was.
Lucy always wakes pitifully,
and even at such a time,
when her body must have been chilled with cold
and her mind somewhat appalled at waking unclad in a churchyard at night,
she did not lose her grace.
She trembled a little and clung to me.
When I told her to come at once with me home,
she rose without a word,
with the obedience of a child.
As we passed along, the gravel hurt my feet,
and Lucy noticed me wince.
She stopped and wanted to insist upon my taking my shoes,
but I would not.
However, when we got to the pathway outside the churchyard,
where there was a puddle of water remaining from the storm,
I daubed my feet with mud,
using each foot in turn on the other,
so that as we went home no one,
in case we should meet anyone,
should notice my bare feet.
Fortune favored us, and we got home without meeting a soul.
Once we saw a man, who seemed not quite sober,
passing along a street in front of us.
But we hid in a door till he had disappeared up an opening,
such as there are here, steep little closes,
or wines, as they call them in Scotland.
My heart beat so loud all the time,
sometimes I thought I should faint.
I was filled with anxiety about Lucy,
not only for her health,
lest she should suffer from the exposure,
but for her reputation, in case a story should get wind.
When we got in, and had washed our feet,
and had said a prayer of thankfulness together,
I tucked her into bed.
Before falling asleep, she asked,
even implored me not to say a word to anyone,
even her mother, about her sleepwalking adventure.
I hesitated at first to promise,
but on thinking of the state of her mother's health,
and how the knowledge of such a thing would fret her,
and think, too, of how such a story might become distorted,
nay, infallibly would, in case it should leak out,
I thought it wiser to do so.
I hope I did right.
I have locked the door, and the key is tied to my wrist,
so perhaps I shall not again be disturbed.
Lucy is sleeping soundly.
The reflex of the dawn is high and far over the sea.
Same day, noon.
All goes well.
Lucy slept till I woke her,
and seemed not to have even changed her side.
The adventure of the night does not seem to have harmed her.
On the contrary, it has benefited her,
for she looks better this morning than she has done for weeks.
I was sorry to notice that my clumsiness with the safety pin hurt her.
Indeed, it might have been serious,
for the skin of her throat was pierced.
I must have pinched up a piece of loose skin,
and have transfixed it,
for there are two little red points like pinpricks,
and on the band of her nightdress was a drop of blood.
When I apologized and was concerned about it,
she laughed and petted me,
and said she did not even feel it.
Fortunately, it cannot leave a scar, as it is too tiny.
Same day, night.
We passed a happy day.
The air was clear, and the sun bright,
and there was a cool breeze.
We took our lunch to Mulgrave Woods,
Mrs. Westenra driving by the road,
and Lucy and I walking by the cliff path,
and joining her at the gate.
I felt a little sad myself,
for I could not but feel how absolutely happy I would have been
had Jonathan been with me.
But there, I must only be patient.
In the evening we strolled in the casino terrace,
and heard some good music by Svor and Mackenzie,
and went to bed early.
Lucy seems more restful than she has been for some time,
and fell asleep once.
I shall lock the door and secure the key the same as before,
though I do not expect any trouble tonight.
My expectations were wrong,
for twice during the night I was wakened by Lucy trying to get out.
She seemed, even in her sleep,
to be a little impatient at finding the door shut,
and went back to bed under a sort of protest.
I woke with the dawn,
and heard the birds chirping outside the window.
Lucy woke too, and I was glad to see,
was even better than on the previous morning.
All her old gay day of manners seemed to have come back,
and she came and snuggled in beside me,
and told me all about Arthur.
I told her how anxious I was about Jonathan,
and then she tried to comfort me.
Well, she succeeded somewhat,
for though sympathy can't alter facts,
it can make them more bearable.
13th August
Another quiet day,
and to bed with the key on my wrist as before.
Again I awoke in the night,
and found Lucy sitting up in bed, still asleep,
pointing to the window.
I got up quietly,
and pulling aside the blind, looked out.
It was brilliant moonlight,
and the soft effect of the light over the sea and sky,
merged together in one great silent mystery,
was beautiful beyond words.
Between me and the moonlight flitted a great bat,
coming and going in great whirling circles.
Once or twice it came quite close,
but was, I suppose, frightened at seeing me,
and flitted away across the harbor towards the abbey.
When I came back from the window,
Lucy had laid down again and was sleeping peacefully.
She did not stir again all night.
14th August
On the east cliff,
reading and writing all day,
Lucy seems to have become as much in love with the spot as I am,
as it is hard to get her away from it
when it is time to come home for lunch or tea or dinner.
This afternoon she made a funny remark.
We were coming home for dinner,
and had come to the top of the steps,
up from the west pier,
and stopped to look at the view, as we generally do.
The setting sun, low down in the sky,
was just dropping behind Kettleness.
The red light was thrown over the east cliff and the old abbey,
and seemed to bathe everything in a beautiful rosy glow.
We were silent for a while,
and suddenly Lucy murmured as if to herself.
His red eyes again,
they are just the same.
It was such an odd expression,
coming apropos of nothing,
that it quite startled me.
I slewed round a little,
so I asked to see Lucy well without seeming to stare at her,
and saw that she was in a half dreamy state,
with an odd look on her face that I could not quite make out,
so I said nothing, but followed her eyes.
She appeared to be looking over at our own seat,
whereupon was a dark figure seated alone.
I was quite a little startled myself,
for it seemed for an instant
as if the stranger had great eyes like burning flames,
but a second look dispelled the illusion.
The red sunlight was shining on the windows
of St. Mary's Church behind our seat,
and as the sun dipped there was just sufficient change
in the reflection and refraction
to make it appear as if the light moved.
I called Lucy's attention to the peculiar effect,
and she became herself with a start,
but she looked sad all the same.
It may have been that she was thinking
of that terrible night up there.
We never refer to it,
so I said nothing, and we went home to dinner.
Lucy had a headache and went early to bed.
I saw her asleep and went out for a little stroll myself.
I walked along the cliffs to the westward
and was full of sweet sadness,
for I was thinking of Jonathan.
When coming home, it was then bright moonlight,
so bright that, though the front of our part
of the crescent was in shadow,
everything could be well seen.
I threw a glance up at our window
and saw Lucy's head leaning out.
I opened my handkerchief and waved it.
She did not notice or make any movement whatever.
Just then, the moonlight crept round an angle
of the building, and the light fell on the window.
There distinctly was Lucy with her head
lying up against the side of the windowsill
and her eyes shut.
She was fast asleep, and by her,
seated on the windowsill,
was something that looked like a good-sized bird.
I was afraid she might get a chill,
so I ran upstairs, but as I came into the room,
she was moving back to her bed,
fast asleep and breathing heavily.
She was holding her hand to her throat,
as though to protect it from the cold.
I did not wake her, but tucked her warmly.
I had taken care that the door was locked
and the window securely fastened.
She looked so sweet as she sleeps,
but she is paler than is her want,
and there is a drawn, haggard look under her eyes,
which I do not like.
I fear she is fretting about something.
I wish I could find out what it is.
Fifteenth August.
Rose later than usual.
Lucy was languid and tired
and slept on after we had been called.
We had a happy surprise at breakfast.
Arthur's father is better
and wants the marriage to come off soon.
Lucy is full of quiet joy,
and her mother is glad and sorry at once.
Later on in the day, she told me the cause.
She is grieved to lose Lucy as her very own,
but she is rejoiced that she is soon
to have someone to protect her.
Poor dear sweet lady.
She confided to me that she has got her death warrant.
She has not told Lucy
and made me promise secrecy.
Her doctor told her that within a few months,
at most, she must die,
for her heart is weakening.
At any time, even now,
a sudden shock would be almost sure to kill her.
We were wise to keep the affair
of the dreadful night of Lucy's sleepwalking.
17th August
No diary for two whole days.
I have not had the heart to write.
Some sort of shadowy pall seems to be coming over our happiness.
No news from Jonathan,
and Lucy seems to be growing weaker
whilst her mother's hours are numbering to a close.
I do not understand Lucy's fading away as she is doing.
She eats well and sleeps well,
and enjoys a fresh air,
but all the time the roses in her cheeks are fading,
and she gets weaker and more languid day by day.
At night I hear her gasping as if for air.
I keep the key of our door always fastened to my wrist at night,
but she gets up and walks about the room
and sits at the open window.
Last night I found her leaning out when I woke up,
and when I tried to wake her I could not.
She was in a faint.
When I managed to restore her,
she was weak as water and cried silently
between long, painful struggles for breath.
When I asked her how she came to be at a window,
she shook her head and turned away.
I trust her feeling ill may not be from that unlucky prick of the safety pin.
I looked at her throat just now as she lay asleep,
and the tiny wounds seemed not to have healed.
They are still open, and if anything, larger than before,
and the edges of them are faintly white.
They are like little white dots with red centers.
Unless they heal within a day or two,
I shall insist on the doctors saying about them.
Letter, Samuel F. Billington & Son, Solicitors Whitby.
To Mrs. Carter, Patterson & Co., London.
17th August.
Dear Sirs, Herewith please receive invoice of goods
sent by Great Northern Railway.
Same are to be delivered at Carfax, near Perfleet,
immediately on receipt at Good Station Kings Cross.
The house is at present empty, but enclosed please find all keys,
all of which are labeled.
You will please deposit the boxes, fifty in number,
which form the consignment,
in the partially ruined building forming part of the house
and marked A on rough diagrams enclosed.
Your agent will easily recognize the locality,
as it is the ancient chapel of the mansion.
The goods leave by the train at 9.30 tonight,
and will be due at Kings Cross at 4.30 tomorrow afternoon.
As our client wishes the delivery to be made as soon as possible,
we shall be obliged by your having teams ready at Kings Cross
at the time named and forwith conveying the goods to destination.
In order to obviate any delays possible through any routine requirements
as to payment in your departments,
we enclose check Herewith for ten pounds,
receipt of which please acknowledge.
Should the charge be less than this amount,
you can return the balance.
If greater, we shall at once send check for difference upon hearing from you.
You are to leave the keys on coming away in the main hall of the house,
where the proprietor may get them on his entering the house
by means of his duplicate key.
Pray do not take us as exceeding the bounds of business courtesy
in pressing you in all ways to use the utmost expedition.
We are, dear sirs, faithfully yours, Samuel F. Billington and son.
Letter.
Missions Carter, Patterson, and Co., London.
To Missions Billington and son, Whitby.
21st August.
Dear sirs, we beg to acknowledge ten pounds received
and to return check of one pound seventeen shillings nine pence,
amount of overplus, as shown in receded account Herewith.
Goods are delivered in exact accordance with instructions,
and keys left in parcel in main hall, as directed.
We are, dear sirs, yours respectfully.
Carter, Patterson, and Co.
Mina Murray's Journal.
18th August.
I am happy today and write singing on the seat in the churchyard.
Lucy is ever so much better.
Last night she slept well all night and did not disturb me once.
The roses seem to be coming back already to her cheeks,
though she is still sadly pale and wan looking.
If she were in any way anemic I can understand it, but she is not.
She is in gay spirits and full of life and cheerfulness.
All the morbid reticence seems to have passed from her,
and she has just reminded me, as if I need any reminding,
of that night and that it was here on this very seat I found her asleep.
And she told me she tapped playfully with the heel of her boot on the stone slab inside.
My poor little feet didn't make much noise then.
I dare say poor old Mr. Swells would have told me that it was because I didn't want to wake up Geordie.
As she was in such a communicative humour I asked her if she had dreamed it all that night.
Before she answered, that sweet puckered look came into her forehead,
which Arthur, I call him Arthur from her habit, says he loves,
and indeed I don't wonder that he does.
Then she went on in a half-dreaming kind of way,
as if trying to recall it to herself.
I didn't quite dream, but it all seemed to be real.
I only wanted to be here, in this spot.
I don't know why, for I was afraid of something, I don't know what.
I remember, though, I suppose I was asleep, passing through the streets and over the bridge.
A fish leaped as I went by, and I leaned over to look at it,
and I heard a lot of dogs howling.
The whole town seemed as it must be full of all dogs howling at once,
as I went up the steps.
Then I had a vague memory of something long and dark with red eyes,
just as we saw in the sunset,
and something very sweet and very bitter all around me at once.
And then I seemed sinking into deep green water,
and there was singing in my ears, as I have heard there is to drowning men,
and then everything seemed passing away from me.
My soul seemed to go out from my body and float about the air.
I seemed to remember that once the west lighthouse was right under me,
and then there was sort of an agonizing feeling,
as if I were in an earthquake,
and I came back and found you shaking my body.
I saw you do it before I felt you.
Then she began to laugh.
It seemed a little uncanny to me, and I listened to her breathlessly.
I did not quite like it, and thought it better not to keep her mind on the subject,
so we drifted on to another subject, and Lucy was like her old self again.
When we got home, the fresh breeze had braced her up,
and her pale cheeks were really more rosy.
Her mother rejoiced when she saw her, and we all spent a very happy evening together.
Nineteenth August. Joy, joy, joy!
Although not all joy. At last, news of Jonathan.
The dear fellow has been ill, that is why he did not ride.
I am not afraid to think it, or to say it, now that I know.
Mr. Hawkins sent me on the letter, and wrote himself oh so kindly.
I am to leave in the morning, and go over to Jonathan,
and to help nurse him if necessary, and to bring him home.
Mr. Hawkins says it would not be a bad thing if we were to be married out there.
I have cried over the good sister's letter,
so I can fill it wet against my bosom, where it lies.
It is of Jonathan, and must be near my heart, for he is in my heart.
My journey is all mapped out, and my luggage ready.
I am only taking one change of dress.
Lisa will bring my trunk to London, and keep it till I send for it.
For it may be that I must write no more.
I must keep it to say to Jonathan, my husband.
The letter that he has seen and touched must comfort me till we meet.
Letter. Sister Agatha.
Hospital of St. Joseph and St. Mary Budapest.
To Miss Wilhema Murray.
12th August. Dear Madame.
I write by desire of Mr. Jonathan Harker,
who is himself not strong enough to write,
though progressing well, thanks to God and St. Joseph and St. Mary.
He has been under our care for nearly six weeks,
suffering from a violent brain fever.
He wishes me to convey his love,
and to say that by this post I write for him
to Mr. Peter Hawkins Exeter, to say,
with his dutiful respects, that he is sorry for his delay,
and that all of his work is completed.
He'll require some few weeks' rest in our sanatorium in the hills,
but will then return.
He wishes me to say that he has not sufficient money with him,
and that he would like to pay for his staying here,
so that others who need shall not be wanting for help.
Believe me.
Yours, with sympathy and all blessings, Sister Agatha.
P.S.
My patient being asleep,
I open this to let you know something more.
He has told me all about you, and that you are shortly to be his wife.
All blessings to you both.
He has had some fearful shock, so says our doctor,
and in his delirium his ravings have been dreadful,
of wolves and poison and blood, of ghosts and demons,
and I fear to say of what.
Be careful of him always, that there may be nothing to excite him
of this kind for a long time to come.
The traces of such an illness as his do not lightly die away.
We should have written long ago, but we knew nothing of his friends,
and there was nothing on him,
nothing that anyone could understand.
He came in the train from Claussenburg,
and the guard was told by the stationmaster there
that he rushed into the station shouting for a ticket home.
Seeing from his violent demeanor that he was English,
they gave him a ticket for the furthest station on the way
thither that the train reached.
Be assured that he is well cared for.
He has won all hearts by his sweetness and gentleness.
He is truly getting on well,
and I have no doubt will in a few weeks will all be himself.
But be careful of him for safety's sake.
There are, I pray, and St. Joseph and St. Mary,
many, many happy years for you both.
Dr. Seward's Diary, 19th August.
Strange and sudden change in Renfield last night.
About eight o'clock he began to get excited
and sniff about as a dog does when setting.
The attendant was struck by his manner.
And knowing my interest in him, encouraged him to talk.
He is usually respectful to the attendant
and at times servile, but tonight the man tells me
he was quite haughty, would not condescend
to talk with him at all.
All he would say was, I don't want to talk to you.
You don't count now. The master is at hand.
The attendant thinks it is some form
of religious mania which has seized him.
If so, we must look out for squalls,
for a strong man with homicidal and religious mania
at once might be dangerous.
The combination is a dreadful one.
At nine o'clock I visited him myself.
His attitude to me was the same as that to the attendant.
In his sublime self-feeling, the difference between
myself and the attendant seemed to him as nothing.
It looks like a religious mania,
and he will soon think that he himself is God.
These infinitesimal distinctions
between man and man are too paltry
for an omnipotent being.
How these madmen give themselves away.
The real God taketh heed lest a sparrow fall.
But the God created from human vanity
sees no difference between an eagle and a sparrow.
Oh, if men only knew.
For a half hour or more Renfield kept getting
excited in greater and greater degree.
I did not pretend to be watching him,
but I kept strict observation all the same.
All at once that shifty look came into his eyes,
which we always see when a madman has seized an idea,
and with it the shifty movements of the head and back
which asylum attendants come to know so well.
He became quiet, and went and sat
on the edge of his bed resignedly,
and looked into space with lackluster eyes.
I thought I would find out if his apathy were real
or only assumed, and tried to lead him to talk of his pets,
a thing which never failed to excite his attention.
At first he made no reply,
but at length and testily.
Bother them all. I don't care a pin about them.
What? I said.
You don't mean to tell me you don't care about spiders?
Spiders at present are his hobby,
and the notebook is filling up with columns of small figures.
To this he answered enigmatically.
The bride-maiden rejoiced the eyes
that wait the coming of the bride,
but when the bride draweth nigh,
then the maidens shine not to the eyes that are filled.
He would not explain himself,
but remained obstinately seated on his bed
all the time I remained with him.
I am weary tonight, and low in spirits.
I cannot but think of Lucy,
and how different things might have been.
If I don't sleep at once,
Chloral, the modern Morpheus,
I must be careful not to let it grow into a habit.
No, I shall take none tonight.
I have thought of Lucy,
and I shall not dishonour her by mixing the two.
If need be, tonight shall be sleepless.
Later.
Glad I made the resolution, gladder that I kept it.
I had lain tossing about,
and had heard the clock strike only twice,
when the night watchman came to see me,
sent up from the ward to say that Renfield had escaped.
I threw on my clothes and ran down at once.
My patient is too dangerous a person to be roaming about.
Those ideas of his might work out dangerously
with strangers.
The attendant was waiting for me.
He said he had not seen him at ten minutes before,
seemingly asleep in his bed,
when he looked through the observation trap in the door.
His attention was called by the sound of the window being wretched out.
He ran back and saw his feet disappear through the window,
and had it once sent for me.
He was only in his night gear and could not be far off.
The attendant thought it would be more useful to watch
where he should go than follow him,
as he might lose sight of him while skidding out of the building by the door.
He is a bulky man and couldn't get through the window.
I am thin, so with his aid I got out,
but feet foremost,
as we were only a few feet above the ground, landed unhurt.
The attendant told me the patient had gone to the left
and had taken a straight line,
so I ran as quickly as I could.
As I got through the belt of trees,
I saw a white figure scale the high wall
which separates our grounds from those of the deserted house.
I ran back at once,
told the watchman to get three or four men immediately
and follow me into the grounds of Carfax
in case our friend might be dangerous.
I got a ladder myself,
and crossing the wall, dropped down to the other side.
I could see Renfield's figure just disappearing
behind the angle of the house, so I ran after him.
On the far side of the house, I found him pressed close
against the old iron-bound oak door of the chapel.
He was talking, apparently to someone,
but I was afraid to go near enough to hear what he was saying
lest I might frighten him, and he should run off.
Chasing an errant swarm of bees is nothing
to following a naked lunatic when a fit of escaping is upon him.
After a few minutes, however,
I could see that he did not take note of anything around him
and so ventured to draw near to him,
the more so as my men had now crossed the wall
and were closing him in. I heard him say,
I am here to do your bidding, master.
I am your slave, and you will reward me, so I shall be faithful.
I have worshipped you long and afar off.
Now that you are near, I await your commands,
and you will not pass me by, will you, dear master,
in your distribution of good things?
He is a selfish old beggar, anyhow.
He thinks of the loaves and fishes,
even when he believes he is in the real presence.
His manias make a startling combination.
When we closed in on him, he fought like a tiger.
He is immensely strong,
for he was more like a wild beast than a man.
I never saw a lunatic in such a paroxysm of rage before,
and I hope I shall not again.
It is mercy that we have found out his strength
and danger in good time.
With strength and determination like his,
he might have done wild work before he was caged.
He is safe now, at any rate.
Jack Shepherd himself couldn't get free
from the straight waistcoat that keeps him restrained,
and he is chained to the wall in the padded room.
His cries are at times awful,
but the silences that follow are more deadly still,
for he means murder in every turn and movement.
Just now he spoke coherent words for the first time.
I shall be patient, Master.
It is coming, coming, coming.
So I took the hint and came to.
I was too excited to sleep,
but this diary has quieted me,
and I feel I shall get some sleep tonight.
DRACULA by Bram Stoker
Letter
Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra, Budapest, 24 August
My dearest Lucy, I know you will be anxious to hear all that has happened since we parted at the railway station at Whitby.
Well, my dear, I got to Hull all right and caught the boat to Hamburg and then the train on here.
I feel that I can hardly recall anything of the journey, except that I knew I was coming to Jonathan, and that as I should have to do some nursing, I had better get all the sleep I could.
I found my dear one, oh so thin and pale and weak looking.
All the resolution has gone out of his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you was in his face has vanished.
He is only a wreck of himself, and he does not remember anything that has happened to him for a long time past.
At least he wants me to believe so, and I shall never ask.
He has had some terrible shock, and I fear it might tax his poor brain if he were to try to recall it.
Sister Agatha, who is a good creature and a born nurse, tells me that he wanted her to tell me what they were.
She would only cross herself and say she would never tell, that the ravings of the sick were the secrets of God, and that if a nurse through her vocation should hear them, she should respect her trust.
She is a sweet, good soul, and the next day when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject my poor dear raved about, added,
I can tell you this much my dear, that it was not about anything which he has done wrong himself, and you as his wife-to-be have no cause to be concerned.
He has not forgotten you, or what he owes to you. His fear was of great and terrible things which no mortal can treat of.
I do believe the dear soul thought I might be jealous lest my poor dear should have fallen in love with any other girl.
The idea of my being jealous about Jonathan, and yet my dear let me whisper I felt a thrill of joy through me when I knew that no other woman was cause for trouble.
I am now sitting by his bedside where I can see his face while he sleeps. He is waking.
When he woke he asked me for his coat as he wanted to get me something from the pocket. I asked Sister Agatha and she brought all his things.
I saw amongst them was his notebook. I was going to ask him to let me look at it, for I knew that I might find some clue to his trouble.
But I suppose he must have seen my wish in my eyes, for he sent me over to the window, saying he wanted to be quite alone for a moment.
Then he called me back and he said to me very solemnly, Wilhelmina.
I knew then that he was in deadly earnest, for he has never called me by that name since he asked me to marry him.
You know dear, my ideas of the trust between husband and wife, there should be no secret, no concealment.
I have had a great shock and when I try to think of what it is I feel my head spin round and I do not know if it was real or the dreaming of the madman.
You know I had brain fever and that is to be mad. The secret is here and I do not want to know it.
I want to take up my life here, with our marriage. For, my dear, we had decided to be married as soon as the formalities are complete.
Are you willing, Wilhelmina, to share my ignorance? Here is the book. Take it and keep it. Read it if you will, but never let me know unless, indeed, some solemn duty should come upon me to go back to the bitter hours, asleep or awake, sane or mad, recorded here.
He fell back exhausted and I put the book under his pillow and kissed him. I have asked sister Agatha to beg the superior to let our wedding be this afternoon and am waiting her reply.
She has come and told me that the chaplain of the English mission church has been sent for. We are to be married in an hour or as soon after as Jonathan awakes.
Lucy, the time has come and gone. I feel very solemn but very, very happy.
Jonathan woke a little after the hour and all was ready and he sat up in bed propped up with pillows.
He answered his I will firmly and strong. I could hardly speak. My heart was so full that even those words seemed to choke me.
The dear sisters were so kind. Please, God, I shall never, never forget them, nor the grave and sweet responsibilities I have taken upon me.
I must tell you of my wedding present when the chaplain and the sisters had left me alone with my husband.
Oh, Lucy, it is the first time I have written the words my husband left me alone with my husband.
I took the book from under his pillow and wrapped it up in white paper and tied it with a little bit of pale blue ribbon which was round my neck
and sealed it over the knot with sealing wax and for my seal I used my wedding ring.
Then I kissed it and showed it to my husband and told him that I would keep it so
and then it would be an outward and visible sign for us all our lives that we trusted each other
that I would never open it unless it were for his own dear's sake or for the sake of some stern duty.
Then he took my hand in his and, oh, Lucy, it was the first time he took his wife's hand
and said that it was the dearest thing in all the wide world and that he would go through all the past again to win it if need be.
The poor dear meant to have set a part of the past but he cannot think of time yet
and I shall not wonder if at first he mixes up not only the month but the year.
Well, my dear, what could I say? I could only tell him that I was the happiest woman in all the wide world
and that I had nothing to give him except myself, my life, and my trust
and that with these went my love and duty for all the days of my life.
And, my dear, when he kissed me and drew me to him with his poor weak hands, it was like a solemn pledge between us.
Lucy, dear, do you know why I tell you all this? It is not only because it is all sweet to me
but because you have been and are very dear to me.
It was my privilege to be your friend and guide you when you came from the schoolroom to prepare for the world of life.
I want you to see now, and with the eyes of a very happy wife, whether duty has led me
so that in your own married life you too may be all happy as I am.
My dear, please, Almighty God, your life, may it be all it promises.
A long day of sunshine with no harsh wind, no forgetting duty, no distrust.
I must not wish you no pain, for that can never be, but I do hope you will always be as happy as I am now.
Good-bye, my dear. I shall post this at once and perhaps write you very soon again.
I must stop, for Jonathan is waking. I must attend my husband.
Your ever-loving, Mina Harker
Letter
Lucy Westenra to Mina Harker
Whitby, 30 August
My dearest Mina, oceans of love and millions of kisses, and may you soon be in your own home with your husband.
I wish you were coming home soon enough to stay with us here.
The strong air would soon restore Jonathan. It has quite restored me.
I have an appetite like a cormorant. I am full of life and sleep well.
You'll be glad to know that I have quite given up walking in my sleep. I think I have not stirred out of my bed for a week.
That is when I once get into it at night.
Arthur says I am getting fat.
By the way, I forgot to tell you that Arthur is here.
We have such walks and drives and rides and rowing and tennis and fishing together, and I love him more than ever.
He tells me that he loves me more, but I doubt that, for at first he told me that he couldn't love me more than he did then.
But this is nonsense.
There he is calling to me, so no more just at present, from your loving Lucy.
P.S. Mother sends her love. She seems better, poor dear.
P.P.S. We are to be married on 28 September.
Dr. Seward's Diary
20 August
The case of Renfield grows even more interesting.
He is now so far quiet that there are spells of cessation from his passion.
For the first week after his attack he was perpetually violent.
Then one night, just as the moon rose, he grew quiet and kept murmuring to himself.
Now I can wait. Now I can wait.
The attendant came to tell me, so I ran down at once to have a look at him.
He was still in the straight waistcoat and in the padded room,
but the suffused look has gone from his face and his eyes had something of their old pleading.
I might almost say cringing softness.
I was satisfied with his present condition and directed him to be relieved.
The attendants hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes without protest.
It was a strange thing that the patient had humour enough to see their distrust,
for, coming close to me, he said in a whisper, all the while looking furtively at them,
they think I could hurt you, fancy me hurting you, the fools.
It was soothing somehow to the feelings to find myself disassociated
even in the mind of this poor madman from the others.
But all the same I could not follow his thought.
Am I to take it that I have anything in common with him, so that we are, as it were, to stand together?
Or has he to gain from me some good so stupendous that my well-being is needful to him?
I must find out later on.
Tonight he will not speak.
Even the offer of a kitten or even a full-grown cat will not tempt him.
He will only say, I don't take any stock in cats.
I have more to think of now, and I can wait, I can wait.
After a while I left him.
The attendant tells me that he was quiet until just before dawn,
and that then he began to get uneasy, and at length violent,
until at last he fell into a paroxysm which exhausted him,
so that he swooned into a sort of coma.
Three nights has the same thing happened.
Violent all day, then quiet from moonrise to sunrise.
I wish I could get some clue to the cause.
It would almost seem as if there was some influence which came and went.
Happy thought.
We shall tonight play sane wits against mad ones.
He escaped before without our help.
Tonight he shall escape with it.
We shall give him a chance and have the men ready to follow in case they are required.
23rd August
The expected always happens.
How well does Rayleigh knew life.
Our bird when he found the cage open would not fly,
so all our subtle arrangements were for naught.
At any rate we have proved one thing,
that the spells of quietness last a reasonable time.
We shall in future be able to ease his bonds for a few hours each day.
I have given orders to the night attendant merely to shut him in the padded room
and once he is quiet, until the hour before sunrise.
The poor soul's body will enjoy the relief even if his mind cannot appreciate it.
Hark! the unexpected again, I am called.
Patient has once more escaped.
Later.
Another night adventure.
Renfield artfully waited until the attendant was entering the room to inspect.
Then he dashed out past him and flew down the passage.
I sent word for the attendants to follow.
Again he went into the grounds of the deserted house
and we found him in the same place pressed against the old chapel door.
When he saw me he became furious
and had not the attendant seized him in time he would have tried to kill me.
As we were holding him a strange thing happened.
He suddenly redoubled his efforts
and then as suddenly grew calm.
I looked round instinctively but could see nothing.
Then I caught the patient's eye and followed it
but could trace nothing as it looked into the moonlight sky
except a big bat which was flapping its silent and ghostly way to the west.
Bats usually wheel about but this one seemed to go straight on
as if it knew where it was bound for or had some intention of its own.
The patient grew calmer every instant and presently said,
You needn't tie me. I shall go quietly.
Without trouble we came back to the house.
I feel that there is something ominous in his calm and shall not forget this night.
Lucy with Stenra's Diary.
Hillingham 24 August.
I must imitate Mina and keep writing things down.
Then we can have long talks when we do meet.
I wonder when it will be.
I wish she were with me again for I feel so unhappy.
Last night I seemed to be dreaming again just as I was at Whitby.
Perhaps it is the change of air or getting home again.
It is all dark and horrid to me for I can remember nothing
but I am full of vague fear and I feel so weak and worn out.
When Arthur came to lunch he looked quite grieved when he saw me
and I had in the spirit to try to be cheerful.
I wonder if I could sleep in mother's room tonight.
I shall make an excuse to try.
25 August.
Another bad night.
Mother Nut seemed to take to my proposal.
She seems not too well herself and doubtless she fears to worry me.
I tried to keep awake and succeeded for a while
but when the clock struck twelve it waked me from a doze
so I must have been falling asleep.
There was a sort of scratching or flapping at the window
but I did not mind it and as I remember no more
I suppose I must have fallen asleep.
More bad dreams.
I wish I could remember them.
This morning I am horribly weak.
My face is ghastly pale and my throat pains me.
It must be something wrong with my lungs
for I don't seem to be getting air enough.
I shall try to cheer up when Arthur comes
or else I know he will be miserable to see me so.
Letter.
Arthur to Dr. Seward.
Albemarle Hotel.
31 August.
My dear Jack, I want you to do me a favour.
Lucy is ill.
That is she has no special disease
but she looks awful and is getting worse every day.
I have asked her if there is any cause.
I do not dare to ask her mother
for to disturb the poor lady's mind about her daughter
and her present state of health would be fatal.
Mrs. Westenra has confided to me that her doom is spoken.
Disease of the heart.
The poor Lucy does not know it yet.
I am sure that there is something praying
on my dear girl's mind.
I am almost distracted when I think of her.
To look at her gives me a pang.
I told her I should ask you to see her
and though she demurred at first
I know why, old fellow, she finally consented.
It will be a painful task for you, I know, old friend,
but it is for her sake and I must not hesitate to ask
or you to act.
You are to come at lunch at Hilling tomorrow.
Two o'clock, so as not to arouse any suspicion
of Mrs. Westenra.
And after lunch Lucy will take an opportunity
of being alone with you.
I am filled with anxiety and I want to consult with you
alone as soon as I can after you have seen her.
Do not fail.
Arthur
TELEGRAM
Arthur Holmwood to Seward
1 September
I am summoned to see my father,
who is worse.
I am writing. Write me fully by tonight's post
to ring.
Wire me if necessary.
Letter
from Dr. Seward to Arthur Holmwood
2 September
My dear old fellow,
with regard to Mrs. Westenra's health
I hasten to let you know at once
that in my opinion there is not any functional disturbance
or any malady that I know of.
At the same time I am not by any means satisfied
with her appearance.
She is woefully different from what she was
when I saw her last.
Of course you must bear in mind
that I have not had the full opportunity of examination
such as I should wish.
Our very friendship makes a little difficulty
which not even medicinal science or custom
can bridge over.
I had better tell you exactly what happened,
leaving you to draw, in a measure, your own conclusions.
I shall then say what I have done
and propose doing.
I found Mrs. Westenra in seemingly gay spirits.
Her mother was present
and in a few seconds I made up my mind
that she was trying all she knew to mislead her mother
and prevent her from being anxious.
I have no doubt she guesses if she does not know
what need of caution there is.
We lunched alone
and as we all exerted ourselves to be
cheerful we got, as some kind of reward
for our labors, some real cheerfulness
amongst us.
Then Mrs. Westenra went to lie down
and Lucy was left with me.
We went into her boudoir.
Until we got there her gaiety remained
for the servants were coming and going.
As soon as the door was closed however
the mask fell from her face
and she sunk down into a chair with a great sigh
and hid her eyes with her hand.
When I saw that her high spirits had
failed I at once took advantage of her
reaction to make a diagnosis.
She said to me very sweetly,
I cannot tell you how I loathe
talking about myself.
I reminded her that a doctor's confidence was sacred
but that you were grievously anxious
about her. She caught on
to my meaning at once and settled that matter
in a word. Tell author
everything you choose. I do not care
for myself but for him
so I am quite free.
I could easily see that she was somewhat
bloodless but I could not see the usual
anemic signs and by the chance
I was able to test the actual quality
of her blood. For an opening
of the window which was stiff a cord
gave way and she cut her hands
slightly with broken glass.
It was a slight matter in itself but it
gave me an evident chance and I secured
a few drops of the blood and have analyzed
them. The qualitative analysis
gave a quite normal condition
and shows I should infer
in itself a vigorous state of health.
In other physical matters
I was quite satisfied that there is no need
for anxiety but as there must be
a cause somewhere I have come to the conclusion
that it must be something mental.
She complains of difficulty
breathing satisfactorily at times
and of heavy lethargic
sleep with dreams that frighten
her but regarding which
she can remember nothing. She says
that as a child she used to walk in her sleep
and that when in Whitby the habit came back
and that once she
walked out in the night and went out to Eastcliff
where Miss Murray found her. But
she assures me that of late that habit has not
returned.
I am in doubt and so have done the best
thing I know of. I have written to
my old friend and master, Professor
Van Helsing of Amsterdam
who knows as much about obscure diseases
as anyone in the world. I have asked
him to come over and as you told me that
all things were to be at your charge I have mentioned
to him who you are and your relation to
Miss Westenra. This my dear
fellow is an obedience to your wishes for I
am only too proud and happy to do anything
I can for her.
Van Helsing would I know
do anything for me for a personal
reason so no matter on what ground he
comes we must accept his wishes.
He is a seemingly arbitrary man
this is because he knows what he is talking
about better than anyone else.
He is a philosopher and a metaphysician
and one of the most advanced scientists
of its day and he has I believe
an absolutely open mind.
This with an iron nerve a temper
of the ice brook and indomitable
resolution, self command and
toleration exalted from virtues to
blessings and the kindliest
and truest heart that beats.
He is from his equipment for the noble
work that he is doing for mankind
work both in theory and practice
for his views are as wide as his
all embracing sympathy.
I tell you these facts that you may know why
I have such confidence in him.
I have asked him to come at once.
I shall see Miss Westenra tomorrow again.
She is to meet me at the stores
so that I may not alarm her mother by too early
a repetition of my call.
Yours always
John Seward
Letter
Abraham Van Helsing
M.D. D.P.H.
D.L.I.T. etc.
To Dr. Seward
2. September
My good friend,
when I received your letter I am already
coming to you. By good fortune I can
leave just as once without wrong to
any of those who have trusted me.
Were fortune other, then it were bad
for those who have trusted, for I come to my
friend when he call me to aid those he holds
dear. Tell your friend that
when time you suck from my wound so swiftly
the poison of the gangrene from that knife
that our other friend too nervous let slip
you did more for him when he wants my aids
and you call for them than all his great
fortune could do. But it is pleasure
added to do for him, your friend,
it is you that I come.
Have near at hand and please
it so arranged that we see the young lady
not too late on tomorrow, for it is likely
that I may have to return here that night.
But if need be I shall come again
in three days and stay longer if it must.
Till then, good-bye,
my friend John.
Van Helsing
Letters
Letter
Dr. Stuart to Hon. Arthur Holmwood
3. September
My dear Art,
Van Helsing is come and gone.
He came on with me to Hillingham and
found that by Lucy's discretion her mother
was lunching out so that we were alone with her.
Van Helsing made a very careful
examination of the patient.
He is to report to me and I shall
advise you, for of course I was not
present all the time.
He is, I fear, much concerned,
but says he must think. When I told
him of our friendship and how you trust me
in the matter, he said, you must tell him
all you think. Tell him, him,
what I think, if you can guess it, if you will.
Nay, I am not jesting.
There is no jest, but life and death,
perhaps more.
I asked what he meant by that, for he was very
serious. This was when we had come back
to town and he was having a cup of tea
before starting on his return to Amsterdam.
He would not give me any further
clue. You must not be angry with me,
Art, because his very reticence
means that all his brains are working for her
good. He will speak plainly enough
when the time comes, be sure.
So I told him I would simply write an account
of our visit, just as if I were doing
a descriptive special article for the Daily
Telegraph. He seemed not to
notice, but remarked that the smuts of London
were not quite so bad as they used to be when he
was a student here. I am to
get his report tomorrow if he can possibly
make it. In any case, I am to have
a letter.
Well, as to the visit, Lucy
was more cheerful than on the day I first
saw her, and certainly looked better.
She had lost something of the ghastly look
that so upset you, and her breathing was normal.
She was very sweet to the Professor,
as she always is, and tried
to make him feel at ease, though I could see
the poor girl was making a hard struggle for it.
I believe Van Helsing
saw it too, for I saw the quick
look under his bushy brows that I knew
of old. Then he began to chat of
all things except ourselves and diseases,
and with such an infinite geniality
that I could see poor Lucy's pretense
of animation merge into reality.
Then, without any seeming change,
he brought the conversation gently round
to his visit, and suavely said,
My dear young Miss, I have the so
great pleasure because you are so much
beloved. That is much, my dear.
Even there, that which I did not
see. They told me you were down
in the spirit, and that you were of a ghastly
tale. To them I say poof,
and he snapped his fingers at me
and went on. But you and I shall
show them how wrong they are. How
can he, and he pointed at me with the same
look and gesture as that which he pointed me
out in his class, on and rather
after a particular occasion which he never
fails to remind me of, know
anything of a young lady's.
He had his mad men to play with and to bring
them back to happiness, and to those
that love them. It is much to do,
and oh, but there are rewards in that we can bestow
such happiness. But the young ladies,
he has no wife nor daughter,
and the young do not tell themselves to the young,
but to the old, like me, who have known
so many sorrows and the causes of them.
So, my dear, we will send him away
to smoke the cigarette in the garden, whilst
you and I have a little talk all to ourselves.
I took the hint
and strolled about, and presently the professor
came to the window and called me in.
He looked grave, but said,
I have made careful examination, but
there is no functional cause. With
you I agree that there has been much blood
lost. It has been,
but is not. But the conditions of her
are in no way anemic. I have asked
her to send me her maid, that I may ask just one
or two questions, that so I may not chance
to miss nothing. I know well
what she will say, and yet there is cause.
There is always cause for
everything. I must go back home and think.
You must send me the telegram every
day, and if there is nothing because, I shall come
again. The disease, for not to be
well as the disease, interests me,
and the sweet, young dear, she interests
me too. She charmed me,
and for her?
It is not for you or disease, I come.
As I tell you,
he would not say a word more, even when we
were alone, and so now, Art, you
know all I know. I shall keep stern
watch. I trust your poor
father is rallying. It must be a
terrible thing to you, my dear fellow, to be
placed in such a position between two people
who are both so dear to you.
I know your idea of duty to your father, and
you are right to stick to it. But if need be,
I shall send you word to come at once to Lucy,
so not be overanxious unless you
hear from me.
Dr. Seward's
Diary
4 September
Zufiga's patient still keeps up our interest
in him. He had only one outburst,
and that was yesterday, at an unusual
time. Just before the stroke of noon,
he began to grow restless.
The attendant knew the symptoms, and at once
summoned aid. Fortunately,
the men came at a run, and were just in time,
for at the stroke of noon he became so
violent that it took all their strength to hold
him. In about five minutes, however,
he began to get more quiet, and finally
sank into a sort of melancholy, in
which state he has remained up to now.
The attendant tells me that his
screams while in the paroxysm
were really appalling. I found
my hands full when I got in, attending
to some of the other patients who were frightened
by him. Indeed, I can quite understand
the effect, for the sounds disturbed
even me, though I was some distance away.
It is now after the dinner hour
of the asylum, and as yet my patient
sits in a corner brooding with a
dull, sullen, woe-begone look
in his face, which seems rather to
indicate than to show something directly.
I cannot quite understand it.
Later.
Another change in my patient.
At five o'clock I looked in on him
and found him seemingly as happy and contented
as he used to be. He was
catching flies and eating them, and was keeping
note of his capture by making nail marks
on the edge of the door between the ridges of
padding. When he saw me he
came over and apologized for his bad
conduct and asked me in a very humble,
cringing way to be led back to his own room
and to have his notebook again.
I thought it well to humor him,
so he is back in his room with the window open.
He has the sugar of his tea
spread out on the windowsill and is
reaping quite a harvest of flies.
He is not now eating them, but
putting them into a box as of old,
and is already examining the corners of his room
to find a spider.
I tried to get him to talk about the past
few days, for any clue to his thoughts would be
of an immense help to me, but he would not
rise. For a moment or two
he looked very sad and said in a sort
of far away voice as though saying it
rather to himself than to me.
All over, all over,
he has deserted me.
No hope for me now unless I do it
myself. Then suddenly
turning to me in a resolute way he
said, Doctor, won't you be
very good to me and let me have a little
more sugar? I think it would be very
good for me. And the
flies, I said.
Yes, the flies like it too,
and I like the flies, therefore
I like it. And there are
people who know so little as to think
that madmen do not argue.
I procured him a double supply and
left him as happy as a man, I suppose,
any in the world.
I wish I could fathom his
mind. Midnight,
another change in him,
I have been to see Miss
Westernera whom I found much better
and has just returned, and was standing
at our own gate looking at the sunset
when once more I heard him yelling.
As his room is on the other side of the
house I could bear it better in the morning.
It was a shock to me to turn from
the wonderful smoky beauty of a
sunset over London with its lurid
lights and inky shadows and all the
marvellous tints that come on foul
clouds, even as on foul water,
and to realise all the grim
sternness of my own cold stone
building with its wealth of
breathing misery and my own
desolate heart to endure it all.
I reached him just as the sun was
going down and from his window saw
the red disc sink.
As it sank he became less and less
frenzied and just as it dipped he
slid from the hands that held him
an inert mass on the floor.
It is wonderful, however,
with intellectual recubative power
lunatics have for within a few
minutes he stood up quite calmly and
looked around him. I signalled to
the attendants not to hold him for I was
anxious to see what he would do.
He went straight over to the window and
brushed out the crumbs of sugar.
Then he took his fly box and emptied it
outside and threw away the box.
Then he shut the window and crossing
over sat down on his bed.
All this surprised me so I asked him
Are you going to keep
flies anymore?
No, said he.
I am sick of all that rubbish.
He certainly is a wonderfully
interesting study.
I wish I could get some glimpse of his mind
or of the cause of his sudden passion.
Stop. There may be a clue
after all if we can find why today
his paroxysms came on at
high noon and at sunset.
Can it be that there is a malign influence
of the sun at periods which affect
certain natures as at times
the moon does others?
We shall see.
TELEGRAM SEWARD
LONDON
to Van Helsing, Amsterdam
6 September
Terrible change for the worse.
Come at once. Do not lose an hour.
I hold over Telegram to Holmwood till I've seen you.
PISKED WEST
PRINCE SEWARD ISLAND
LETTER, Dr. Seward, to Hon. Arthur Homewood, 6th of September.
My dear Art, my news to-day is not so good.
Lucy this morning had gone back a bit.
There is, however, one good thing which has arisen from it.
Mrs. Westernra was naturally anxious concerning Lucy, and has consulted me professionally
about her.
I took advantage of the opportunity, and told her that my old master, Van Helsink, the great
specialist, was coming to stay with me, and that I would put her in his charge conjointly
with myself.
So now we can come and go without alarming her unduly, for a shock to her would mean
sudden death, and this, in Lucy's weak condition, might be disastrous to her.
We are hedged in with difficulties, all of us, my poor fellow, but, please God, we shall
come through them all right.
If any need, I shall write, so that, if you do not hear from me, take it for granted that
I am simply waiting for news, in haste, yours ever, John Seward.
Dr. Seward's Diary
7th of September.
The first thing Van Helsink said to me when we met at Liverpool Street was, Have you
said anything to a young friend to love of her?
No, I said.
I waited till I had seen you, as I said in my telegram.
I wrote him a letter, simply telling him that you were coming, as Miss Westernra was not
so well, and that I should let him know if need be.
Right, my friend, he said.
Quite right, better he not know as yet.
Perhaps he will never know.
I pray so, but if it be needed, then he shall know all.
And my good friend John, let me caution you.
You deal with the madmen.
All men are mad in some way or the other, and inasmuch as you deal discreetly with your
madmen, so deal with God's madmen too, the rest of the world.
You tell not your madmen what you do, nor why you do it.
You tell them not what you think.
So you shall keep knowledge in its place, where it may rest, where it may gather its
kind around it and breed.
You and I shall keep as yet what we know here and here.
He touched me on the heart and on the forehead, and then touched himself the same way.
I have for myself thoughts at the pleasant.
Later I shall unfold to you.
Why not now?
I asked.
It may do some good.
We may arrive at some decision.
He looked at me and said,
My friend John, while the corn is grown, even before it has ripened, while the milk of its
mother earth is in him, and the sunshine has not yet begun to paint him with his gold,
the husbandman, he pull the air and rub him between his rough hands, and blow away the
green chaff, and say to you, Look, he's good corn.
He will make a good crop when the time comes.
I did not see the application, and told him so.
For reply he reached over and took my ear in his hand and pulled it playfully, as he
used long ago to do at lectures, and said, The good husbandman tell you so then because
he knows, but not till then.
But you do not find the good husbandman dig up his planted corn to see if he grow.
That is for the children who play a husbandry, and not for those who take it as of other
work of their life.
See you now, friend John.
I have sown my corn, and Nature has her work to do in making it sprout.
If he sprout at all, there is some promise, and I wait till the ear begins to swell.
He broke off, for he evidently saw that I understood.
Then he went on gravely, You were always a careful student, and your case book was ever
more full than the rest, and I trust that good habit hath not failed.
Remember, my friend, that knowledge is stronger than memory, and we should not trust the weaker.
Even if you have not kept a good practice, let me tell you that this case of our dear
miss is one that may be, mind I say may be, of such interest to us and others that all
the rest may not make him kick the beam, as your people say.
Take then good note of it.
Nothing is too small.
I counsel you put down in record even your doubts and surmises.
Hereafter it may be of interest to you to see how true you guess.
We learn from failure, not from success.
When I described Lucy's symptoms, the same as before, but infinitely more marked, he
looked very grave, but said nothing.
He took with him a bag in which were many instruments and drugs, the ghastly paraphernalia
of our beneficial trade, as he once called, in one of his lectures, the equipment of a
of the healing craft.
When we were shown in, Mrs. Westlandra met us.
She was alarmed, but not nearly so much as I expected to find her.
Nature in one of her beneficent moods has ordained that even death has some antidote
to its own terrors.
Here in a case where any shock may prove fatal, matters are so ordered that, from some cause
or other, the things not personal, even the terrible change in her daughter to whom she
is so attached, do not seem to reach her.
It is something like the way damed nature gathers round a foreign body an envelope of
some insensitive tissue which can protect from evil that which it would otherwise harm
by contact.
If this be an ordered selfishness, then we should pause before we condemn anyone for
the vice of egoism, for there may be deeper root for its causes than we have knowledge
of.
I used my knowledge of this phase of spiritual pathology and set down a rule that she should
not be present with Lucy, or think of her illness more than was absolutely required.
She ascended readily, so readily that I saw again the hand of nature fighting for life.
Van Helsing and I were shown up to Lucy's room.
If I was shocked when I saw her yesterday, I was horrified when I saw her today.
She was ghastly, chalkily pale.
The red seemed to have gone even from her lips and gums, and the bones of her face stood
out prominently.
Her breathing was painful to see or hear.
Van Helsing's face grew set as marble, and his eyebrows converged till they almost touched
over his nose.
Lucy lay motionless, and did not seem to have strength to speak, so for a while we were
all silent.
Then Van Helsing beckoned me, and we went gently out of the room.
The instant we had closed the door, he stepped quickly along the passage to the next door,
which was open.
Then he pulled me quickly in with him and closed the door.
My God! he said, this is dreadful.
There is not time to be lost.
She will die for sheer want of blood to keep the hut's action as it should be.
There must be a transfusion of blood at once.
Is it you or me?
I am younger and stronger, Professor.
It must be me.
Then get ready at once.
I will bring up my bag.
I am prepared.
I went downstairs with him, and as we were going there was a knock at the hall door.
When we reached the hall, the maid had just opened the door, and Arthur was stepping quickly
in.
He rushed up to me, saying in an eager whisper, Jack, I was so anxious.
I read between the lines of your letter, and I have been in an agony.
The dad was better, so I ran down here to see for myself.
Is not that gentleman Dr. Van Helsing?
I am so thankful to you, sir, for coming.
When first the Professor's eyes had lit upon him, he had been angry at his interruption
at such a time, but now, as he took in his stalwart proportions and recognized the strong
young manhood which seemed to emanate from him, his eyes gleamed.
Without a pause he said to him as he held out his hand, Sir, you have come in time.
You are the lover of our dear Miss.
She is bad, very, very bad.
Nay, my child, do not go like that, for he suddenly grew pale and sat down in a chair
almost fainting.
You ought to help her.
You can do more than any that live, and your courage is your best help.
What can I do?
asked Arthur hoarsely.
Tell me, and I shall do it.
My life is hers, and I would give the last drop of my blood in my body for her.
The Professor has a strongly humorous side, and I could from old knowledge detect a trace
of its origin in his answer.
My young Sir, I do not ask so much as that, not the last.
What shall I do?
There was fire in his eyes, and his open nostrils quivered with intent.
Van Helsing slapped him on the shoulder.
Come, he said, you are a man, and it is a man we want.
You are better than me, better than my friend John.
Arthur looked bewildered, and the Professor went on by explaining in a kindly way.
Young Miss is bad, very bad.
She wants blood, and blood she must have or die.
My friend John and I have consulted, and we are about to perform what we call transfusion
of blood, to transfer from full veins of one to the empty veins which pine for him.
John was to give his blood, as he is the more young and strong than me.
Here Arthur took my hand and wrung it hard in silence.
But now you are here, you are more good than us, old or young, who toil much in the world
of thought.
Our nerves are not so calm and our blood so bright than yours.
Arthur turned to him and said,
If you only knew how gladly I would die for her you would understand.
He stopped with a sort of choke in his voice.
Good boy, said Van Helsing.
In the not so far off you will be happy that you have done all for her you love.
Come now and be silent.
You shall kiss her once before it is done, but then you must go and you must leave at
my sign.
Say no word to madam.
You know how it is with her.
There must be no shock.
Any knowledge of this would be one.
Come."
We all went up to Lucy's room.
Arthur by direction remained outside.
Lucy turned her head and looked at us, but said nothing.
She was not asleep, but she was simply too weak to make the effort.
Her eyes spoke to us.
That was all.
Van Helsing took some things from his bag and laid them on a little table out of sight.
Then he mixed a narcotic, and coming over to the bed said cheerily,
Now, little miss, here is your medicine.
Drink it off like a good child.
See I lift you so that to swallow is easy yet.
She had made the effort with success.
It astonished me how long the drug took to act.
This in fact marked the extent of her weakness.
The time seemed endless until sleep began to flicker in her eyelids.
At last, however, the narcotic began to manifest its potency, and she fell into a deep sleep.
When the professor was satisfied, he called Arthur into the room and bade him strip off
his coat.
Then he added, You may take that one little kiss whilst I bring over the table.
Finchon, help to me.
So neither of us looked while he bent over her.
Van Helsing turning to me said, He is so young and strong and of blood so pure that we need
not defibrinate it.
Then with swiftness, but with absolute method, Van Helsing performed the operation.
As the transfusion went on, something like life seemed to come back to poor Lucy's cheeks,
and through Arthur's growing power the joy of his face seemed absolutely to shine.
After a bit I began to grow anxious, for the loss of blood was telling on Arthur, strong
man as he was.
It gave me an idea of what a terrible strain Lucy's system must have undergone that what
weakened Arthur only partially restored her.
But the professor's face was set, and he stood watch in hand, and with his eyes fixed now
on the patient and now on Arthur.
I could hear my own heartbeat.
Presently he said in a soft voice, Do not stir an instant.
It is enough.
You will attend him, I will look to her.
When all was over, I could see how much Arthur was weakened.
I dressed the wound and took his arm to bring him away.
When Van Helsing spoke, without turning round, the man seems to have eyes in the back of
his head, the brave lover, I think, that serve another kiss which he shall have presently.
And as he had now finished his operation, he adjusted the pillow to the patient's head.
As he did so, the narrow black velvet band, which she seems always to wear around her
throat, buckled with an old diamond buckle which her lover had given her, was dragged
a little up, and showed a red mark on her throat.
Arthur did not notice it.
But I could hear the deep hiss of in-drawn breath, which is one of Van Helsing's ways
of betraying emotion.
He said nothing at the moment, but turned to me, saying, Now take him down, our brave
young lover, give him of the port wine, and let him lie down awhile.
He must then go home and rest, sleep much, and eat much, that he may be recruited of
what he has so given to his love.
He must not stay here.
Hold a moment.
I may take it, sir, that you are anxious of result.
Then bring it with you that in all ways the operation is successful.
You have saved her life this time, and you can go home and rest easy in mind that all
that can be is.
I shall tell her all when she is well.
She shall love you none the less for what you have done.
Good-bye."
When Arthur had gone, I went back to the room.
Lucy was sleeping gently, but her breathing was stronger.
I could see the counter-pain move as her breast heaved.
By the bedside sat Van Helsing, looking at her intently.
The velvet band again covered the red mark.
I asked the professor in a whisper, What do you make of that mark on her throat?
What do you make of it?
I have not examined it yet, I answered, and then and there proceeded to loose the band.
Just over the external jugular vein there were two punctures, not large, but not wholesome
looking.
There was no sign of disease, but the edges were white and worn-looking, as if by some
trituration.
It at once occurred to me that this wound, or whatever it was, might be the means of
that manifest loss of blood.
But I abandoned the idea as soon as it formed, for such a thing could not be.
The whole bed would have been drenched to a scarlet with the blood which the girl must
have lost to leave such a pallor as she had before the transfusion.
Well? said Van Helsing.
Well, said I, I can make nothing of it.
The professor stood up.
I must go back to Amsterdam to-night, he said.
There are books and things there which I want.
You must remain here all night, and you must not let your sight pass from her.
Shall I have a nurse? I asked.
We are the best nurses, you and I. You keep watch all night.
See that she is well fed, and that nothing disturbs her.
You must not sleep all the night.
Later on we can sleep, you and I.
I shall be back as soon as possible, and then we may begin.
May begin?
I said.
What on earth do you mean?
We shall see, he answered, as he hurried out.
He came back a moment later, and put his head inside the door, and said, with a warning
finger held up, Remember, she is your charge.
If you leave her, and harm befall, you shall not sleep easy hereafter.
Dr. Seward's diary, continued.
8th of September.
I sat up all night with Lucy.
The opiate worked itself off towards dusk, and she waked naturally.
She looked a different being from what she had been before the operation.
Her spirits even were good, and she was full of a happy vivacity, but I could see evidences
of the absolute prostration which she had undergone.
When I told Mrs. Westenra that Dr. Van Helsing had directed that I should sit up with her,
she almost poo-pooed the idea, pointing out her daughter's renewed strength and excellent
spirits.
I was firm, however, and made preparations for my long vigil.
When her maid had prepared her for the night, I came in, having in the meantime had supper,
and took a seat by the bedside.
She did not in any way make objection, but she looked at me gratefully whenever I caught
her eye.
After a long spell she seemed sinking off to sleep, but with an effort seemed to pull
herself together and shook it off.
It was apparent that she did not want to sleep, so I tackled the subject at once.
You do not want to sleep?
No, I am afraid.
Afraid to go to sleep?
Why so?
It is the boon we all crave for.
Oh, not if you were like me, if sleep was to you a presage of horror.
A presage of horror?
What on earth do you mean?
I don't know.
Oh, I don't know.
And that is what is so terrible.
All this weakness comes to me in sleep until I dread the very thought.
But, my dear girl, you may sleep tonight.
I am here watching you, and I can promise that nothing will happen.
I can trust you, she said.
I seized the opportunity and said, I promise that if I see any evidence of bad dreams I
will wake you at once.
You will?
Will you really?
How good you are to me.
Then I will sleep.
And almost at the word she gave a deep sigh of relief and sank back asleep.
All night long I watched by her.
She never stirred, but slept on and on in a deep, tranquil, life-giving, health-giving
sleep.
Her lips were slightly parted, and her breast rose and fell with the regularity of a pendulum.
There was a smile on her face, and it was evident that no bad dreams had come to disturb
her peace of mind.
In the early morning her maid came, and I left her in her care and took myself back
home, for I was anxious about many things.
I sent a short wire to Van Helsing and to Arthur, telling them of the excellent result
of the operation.
My own work, with its manifold arrears, took me all day to clear off.
It was dark when I was able to inquire about my oophages patient.
The report was good.
He had been quite quiet for the past day and night.
A telegram came from Van Helsing at Amsterdam whilst I was at dinner, suggesting that I
be at Hillingham tonight, as it might be well to be at hand, and stating that he was leaving
by the night mail and would join me early in the morning.
9 September.
I was pretty tired and worn out when I got to Hillingham.
For the two nights I had hardly had a wink of sleep, and my brain was beginning to feel
that numbness which marks cerebral exhaustion.
Lucy was up and in cheerful spirits.
When she shook hands with me she looked sharply in my face and said,
I would not argue the point, but went and had my supper.
Lucy came with me, and, enlivened by her charming presence, I made an excellent meal and had
a couple of glasses of the more than excellent port.
Then Lucy took me upstairs and showed me a room next to her own where a cozy fire was
burning.
Now, she said, you must stay here.
I shall leave this door open and my door too.
You can lie on the sofa, for I know that nothing would induce any of you doctors to go to bed
whilst there is a patient above the horizon.
If I want anything I shall call out, and you can come to me at once.
I could not but acquiesce, for I was dog-tired, and could not have sat up had I tried.
So, on her renewing her promise to call me if she should want anything, I lay on the
sofa and forgot all about everything.
Lucy Westenra's Diary
9th of September.
I feel so happy to-night.
I have been so miserably weak that to be able to think and move about is like feeling sunshine
after a long spell of east wind out of a steel sky.
Somehow Arthur feels very, very close to me.
I seem to feel his presence warm about me.
I suppose it is that sickness and weakness are selfish things and turn our inner eyes
and sympathy on ourselves, whilst health and strength give love rein, and in thought and
feeling he can wander where he wills.
I know where my thoughts are, if only Arthur knew.
My dear, my dear, your ears must tingle as you sleep as mine do waking.
Oh, the blissful rest of last night!
How I slept!
Were that dear, good Dr. Seward watching me?
And to-night I shall not fear to sleep, since he is close at hand and within call.
Thank everybody for being so good to me.
Thank God!
Good night, Arthur.
Dr. Seward's Diary
10th of September.
I was conscious of the Professor's hand on my head and started to wake all in a second.
That is one of the things that we learn in an asylum at any rate.
And how is our patient?
Well, when I left her, or rather when she left me, I answered.
Come, let us see, he said, and together we went into the room.
The blind was down, and I went over to raise it gently, whilst Van Helsing stepped with
his soft cat-like tread over to the bed.
As I raised the blind and the morning sunlight flooded the room, I heard the Professor's
slow hiss of inspiration, and knowing its rarity, a deadly fear shot through my heart.
As I passed over, he moved back, and his exclamation of horror, caught in the himmel, needed no
enforcement from his agonized face.
He raised his hand and pointed to the bed, and his ironed face was drawn and ash-and-white.
I felt my knees begin to tremble.
There on the bed, seemingly in a swoon, lay poor Lucy, more horribly white and bland-looking
than ever.
Even the lips were white, and the gums seemed to have shrunken back from the teeth, as
we sometimes see in a corpse after a prolonged illness.
Van Helsing raised his foot to stamp in anger, but the instinct of his life and all the long
years of habit stood to him, and he put it down again softly.
Quick, he said, bring the brandy.
I flew to the dining-room and returned with a decanter.
He wedded the poor white lits with it, and together we rubbed palm and wrist and heart.
He felt her heart, and after a few moments of agonizing suspense said,
It is not too late.
It beats, though but feebly.
All our work is undone.
We must begin again.
There is no young author here now.
I have to call on you yourself this time, friend John.
As he spoke, he was dipping into his bag and producing the instruments of transfusion.
I had taken off my coat and rolled up my shirt-sleeve.
There was no possibility of an opiate just at present, and no need of one, and so without
a moment's delay we began the operation.
After a time, it did not seem a short time either, for the draining away of one's blood,
no matter how willingly it be given, is a terrible feeling.
Van Helsing held up a warning finger.
Do not stir, he said, but I fear that with growing strength she may wake, and that would
make danger oh so much danger.
But I shall precaution take, I shall give hypodemic injection of morphia.
He proceeded then swiftly and deftly to carry out his intent.
The effect on Lucy was not bad, for the faint seemed to merge subtly into the narcotic sleep.
It was with a feeling of personal pride that I could see a faint tinge of color steal back
into the pallid cheeks and lips.
No man knows till he experiences it what it is to feel his own life-blood drawn away into
the veins of the woman he loves.
The Professor watched me critically.
That will do, he said.
Already, I remonstrated, you took a great deal more from Art, to which he smiled a sad
sort of smile as he replied, He is her lover, her fiancé.
You have work, much work to do for her and for others, and the present will suffice.
When we stopped the operation he attended to Lucy, whilst I applied digital pressure
incision.
I lay down while I waited his leisure to attend to me, for I felt faint and a little sick.
By and by he bound up my wound and sent me downstairs to get a glass of wine for myself.
As I was leaving the room he came after me and half whispered, Mind, nothing must be
said of this, for young lovers should turn up unexpected as before, no word to him.
It would at once frighten him and enjealous him too, there must be none, so.
When I came back he looked at me carefully and then said, You are not much to the West,
go into the room and lie on your sofa and rest awhile, then have much breakfast and
come here to me.
I followed out his orders, for I knew how right and wise they were.
I had done my part, and now my next duty was to keep up my strength.
I felt very weak, and in the weakness lost something of the amazement at what had occurred.
I fell asleep on the sofa, however, wondering over and over again how Lucy had made such
a retrograde movement and how she could have been drained of so much blood with no sign
anywhere to show for it.
I think I must have continued my wonder in my dreams, for sleeping and waking my thoughts
always came back to the little punctures in her throat and the ragged, exhausted appearance
of their edges, tiny though they were.
Lucy slept well into the day, and when she woke she was fairly well and strong, though
not nearly so much so as the day before.
When Van Helsing had seen her, he went out for a walk, leaving me in charge, with strict
injunctions that I was not to leave her for a moment.
I could hear his voice in the hall, asking the way to the nearest telegraph office.
Lucy chatted with me freely, and seemed quite unconscious that anything had happened.
I tried to keep her amused and interested.
When her mother came up to see her, she did not seem to notice any change whatever, but
said to me gratefully,
"'We owe you so much, Dr. Seward, for all you have done, but you really must now take
care not to overwork yourself.
You are looking pale yourself.
You want a wife to nurse and look after you a bit, that you do.'
As she spoke, Lucy turned crimson, though it was only momentarily, for her poor, wasted
could not stand for long an unwanted drain to the head.
The reaction came in excessive pallor as she turned imploring eyes on me.
I smiled and nodded, and laid my finger on my lips.
With a sigh she sank back amid her pillows.
Van Helsing returned in a couple of hours, and presently said to me,
"'Now you go home, and eat much and drink enough.
Make yourself strong.
I stay here tonight, and I shall sit up with Little Miss myself.
You and I must watch the case, and we must have none other to know.
I have grave reasons.
No, do not ask me.
Think what you will.
Do not fear to think even the most not improbable.
Good night.'
In the hall two of the maids came to me, and asked if they or either of them might not
sit up with Miss Lucy.
They implored me to let them, and when I said it was Dr. Van Helsing's wish that either
he or I should sit up, they asked me quite piteously to intercede with the foreign gentleman.
I was much touched by their kindness.
Perhaps it is because I am weak at present, and perhaps because it was on Lucy's account
that their devotion was manifested.
For over and over again have I seen similar instances of woman's kindness.
I got back here in time for a late dinner, went my rounds all well, and set this down
whilst waiting for sleep.
It is coming.
11th of September.
This afternoon I went over to Hillingham.
Found Van Helsing in excellent spirits, and Lucy much better.
Shortly after I had arrived, a big parcel from abroad came for the professor.
He opened it with much impressment, assumed, of course, and showed a great bundle of white
flowers.
"'These are for you, Miss Lucy,' he said.
"'For me?
Oh, Dr. Van Helsing!
Yes, my dear, but not for you to play with.
These are medicines.'
Here Lucy made a wry face.
"'Nate, but they are not to take in a decoction or in nauseous form, so you need not snub
that so charming nose, or I shall point out to my friend Arthur what woes he may have
to endure in seeing so much beauty that he so loves so much distort.'
"'Aha, my pretty miss, that brings the so nice nose all straight again.
This is medicinal, but you do not know how.
I put him in your window.
I make pretty wreath and hang him round your neck so you sleep well.
Oh, yes, they, like the lotus flower, make your trouble forgotten.
It smells so like the waters of Lethe and of that fountain of use that the conquistador
sought for in the Florida's and find him all too late.'
Whilst he was speaking, Lucy had been examining the flowers and smelling them.
Now she threw them down, saying, with half laughter and half disgust,
"'Oh, Professor, I believe you are only putting up a joke on me.
Why, these flowers are only common garlic.'
To my surprise Van Helsing rose up and said with all his sternness, his iron-jaw set and
his bushy eyebrows meeting,
"'No trifling with me, I never jest.
There is grim purpose in what I do, and I warn you that you do not thwart me.
Take care for the sake of others, if not for your own.'
Then seeing poor Lucy scared, as she might well be, he went on more gently,
"'Oh, little miss, my dear, do not fear me.
I only do for your good, but there is much virtue to you in those so common flowers.
See I place them myself in your room.
I make myself the wreath that you are to wear.
But hush, no telling to others that make so inquisitive questions.
We must obey, and silence is a part of obedience, and obedience is to bring your strong and
well into loving arms that wait for you.
Now sit still a while.
Come with me, friend John, and you shall help me deck the room with my garlic, which is
all the way from Haarlem, where my friend Van der Poel raise herb in his glass houses
all the year.
I had to telegraph yesterday, or they would not have been here.'
We went into the room, taking the flowers with us.
The professor's actions were certainly odd, and not to be found in any pharmacopoeia that
I ever heard of.
First he fastened up the windows and latched them securely.
Next, taking a handful of the flowers, he rubbed them all over the sashes, as though
to ensure that every whiff of air that might get in would be laden with a garlic smell.
Then with a wisp he rubbed all over the jamb of the door, above, below, and at each side,
and round the fireplace in the same way.
It all seemed grotesque to me.
And presently I said,
"'Well, professor, I know you always have a reason for what you do, but this certainly
puzzles me.
It is well we have no skeptic here, or he would say that you were working some spell
to keep out an evil spirit.'
"'Perhaps I am,' he answered quietly, as he began to make the wreath which Lucy was
to wear round her neck.
We then waited whilst Lucy made her toilet for the night, and when she was in bed he
came and himself fixed the wreath of garlic round her neck.
The last words he said to her were,
"'Take care you do not disturb it, and even if the room feel close, do not tonight open
the window or the door.'
"'I promise,' said Lucy,
"'and thank you both a thousand times for all your kindness to me.
Oh, what have I done to be blessed with such friends?'
As we left the house in my fly, which was waiting, Van Helsing said,
"'Tonight I can sleep in peace, and sleep I want.
Two nights of travel, much reading in the day between, and much anxiety on the day to
follow, and a night to sit up without to wink.
"'Tomorrow in the morning early you call for me, and we come together to see a pretty
miss, so much stronger from my spell which I have worked.
Ho, ho!'
He seemed so confident, that I, remembering my own confidence two nights before, and with
the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror.
It must have been my weakness that made me hesitate to tell it to my friend, but I felt
it all the more like unshed tears."
Dracula by Bram Stoker.
Lucy Wisterna's Diary.
12 September.
How good they all are to me.
I quite love that dear Dr. Van Helsing.
I wonder why he was so anxious about these flowers.
He positively frightened me he was so fierce.
And yet he must have been right, for I feel comfort from them already.
Somehow, I do not dread being alone tonight.
And I can go to sleep without fear.
I shall not mind any flapping outside the window.
Oh, the terrible struggle that I have had against sleep so often of late.
The pain of sleeplessness.
Or the pain of the fear of sleep.
And with such unknown horrors as it has for me.
How blessed are some people whose lives have no fears, no dreads.
To whom sleep is a blessing that comes on nightly.
And brings nothing but sweet dreams.
Well, here I am tonight, hoping for sleep.
And lying like Ophelia in the play.
With virgin crants and maiden struments.
I never liked garlic before, but tonight it is delightful.
There is peace in its smell.
I feel sleep coming already.
Good night, everybody.
Dr. Seward's Diary, 13 September.
Called at the Berkeley and found Van Helsing.
As usual, up to time.
The carriage ordered from the hotel was waiting.
The professor took his bag, which he always brings with him now.
Let all be put down exactly.
Van Helsing and I arrived at Hillingham at eight o'clock.
It was a lovely morning.
The bright sunshine and all the fresh feeling of early autumn
seemed like the completion of nature's annual work.
The leaves were turning to all kinds of beautiful colours.
But had not yet begun to drop from the trees.
When we entered we met Mrs. Westerna.
Coming out of the morning room.
She is always an early riser.
She greeted us warmly and said,
You will be glad to know that Lucy is better.
The dear child is still asleep.
I looked into her room and saw her,
but did not go in lest I should disturb her.
The professor smiled and looked quite jubilant.
He rubbed his hands together and said,
Aha! I thought I had diagnosed the case.
My treatment is working.
To which she replied,
You must not take all the credit to yourself, doctor.
Lucy's state this morning is due in part to me.
How do you mean, ma'am? asked the professor.
Well, I was anxious about the dear child in the night
and went into her room.
She was sleeping soundly.
So soundly that even my coming did not wake her.
But the room was awfully stuffy.
There were a lot of those horrible strong-smelling flowers
about everywhere and she had actually
a bunch of them round her neck.
I feared that the heavy odour would be too much
for the dear child in her weak state
so I took them all away and opened a bit of the window
to let in a little fresh air.
You will be pleased with her, I am sure.
She moved off into her boudoir
where she usually breakfasted early.
As she had spoken I watched the professor's face
and saw it turn ash and grey.
He had been able to retain his self-command
whilst the poor lady was present
for he knew her state and how mischievous
a shock would be.
He actually smiled on her
as he held open the door for her to pass into her room.
But the instant she disappeared
he pulled me suddenly and forcibly
into the dining room and closed the door.
Then, for the first time in my life
I saw Van Helsing break down.
He raised his hands over his head
in a sort of mute despair
and then beat his palms together in a helpless way.
Finally he sat down on a chair
and putting his hands before his face
began to sob with loud dry sobs
that seemed to come from the very racking of his heart.
Then he raised his arms again
as though appealing to the whole universe.
God, God, God, he said.
What have we done?
What has this poor thing done?
That we are so sore beset.
Is there fate amongst us still?
Send down from the pagan world of old
that such things must be in such a way.
This poor mother, all unknowing
and all for the best as she think
does such thing as lose her daughter, body and soul.
And we must not tell her.
We must not even warn her
before she die, then both die.
Oh, how we are beset.
How are all the powers of devils against us?
Suddenly he jumped to his feet.
Come, he said, come!
We must see an act.
Devils are no devils.
Or all the devils at once, it matters not.
We must fight him all the same.
He went to the hall door for his bag
and together we went up to Lucy's room.
Once again I drew the blind
whilst Van Helsing went towards the bed.
This time he did not start as he looked on the poor face
with the same awful waxen pallor as before.
He wore a look of stern sadness and infinite pity.
As I expected, he murmured
with that hissing inspiration of his which meant so much.
Without a word he went and locked the door
and then began to set out on a little table
the instruments for yet another operation
of transfusion of blood.
I had long ago recognized the necessity
and begun to take off my coat
but he stopped me with a warning hand.
No, he said.
Today you must operate.
I shall provide.
You were weakened already.
As he spoke he took off his coat
and rolled up his shirt sleeve.
Again the operation.
Again the narcotic.
Again some return of colour to the ashy cheeks
and the regular breathing of healthy sleep.
This time I watched whilst
Van Helsing recruited himself and rested.
Presently he took an opportunity
of telling Mrs. Westernra
that she must not remove anything from Lucy's room
without consulting him.
That the flowers were of medicinal value
and that the breathing of their order
was part of the system of the cure.
Then he took over the care of the case himself
saying that he would watch this night and the next
and would send me word when to come.
After another hour Lucy waked from her sleep
fresh and bright and seemingly not much the worse
for her terrible ordeal.
What does it all mean?
I'm beginning to wonder if my long habit of life
amongst the insane
is beginning to tell upon my own brain.
Lucy Westernra's Diary
17 September
Four days and nights of peace.
I'm getting so strong again that I hardly know myself.
It is as if I had passed through some long nightmare
and had just awakened to see the beautiful sunshine
and feel the fresh air of the morning around me.
I have a dim half-remembrance of long anxious times
of waiting and fearing.
Darkness in which there was not even the pain of hope
to make the present distress more poignant.
And then long spells of oblivion
and the rising back to life as a diver
coming up through a great press of water.
Since, however, Dr Van Helsing has been with me
all this bad dreaming seems to have passed away.
The noises that used to so frighten me
out of my wits, the flapping against the windows,
the distant voices which seemed so close to me,
the harsh sounds that came from I know not where
and commanded me to do I know not what
have all ceased.
I go to bed now without any fear of sleep.
I do not even try to keep awake.
I have grown quite fond of the garlic
and a boxful arrives for me every day from Harlem.
Tonight Van Helsing is going away.
And he has to be for a day in Amsterdam.
But I need not be watched.
I am well enough to be left alone.
Thank God for Mother's sake and dear Arthur's,
for all our friends have been so kind.
I shall not even feel the change,
for last night Dr Van Helsing slept in his chair
a lot of the time.
I found him asleep twice when I awoke.
But I did not fear to go to sleep again,
although the boughs or bats or something
flapped almost angrily against the window panes.
The Pall Mall Gazette, 18 September.
The escaped wolf, perilous adventure
of our interviewer, interview with the keeper
in the zoological gardens.
After many inquiries and almost as many refusals
and perpetually using the words Pall Mall Gazette
as a sort of talisman, I managed to find
the keeper of the section of the zoological gardens
in which the wolf department is included.
Thomas Builder lives in one of the cottages
in the enclosure behind the elephant house
and was just sitting down to his tea when I found him.
Thomas and his wife are hospitable folk,
elderly and without children.
And if the specimen I enjoyed of their hospitality
be of the average kind, their lives must be
pretty comfortable. The keeper would not enter
on what he called business until the supper was over
and we were all satisfied.
Then when the table was cleared and he had lit his pipe
he said, Now sir, you can go on
and ask me what you want. You'll excuse me
for refusing to talk of professional subjects
of four meals. I gives the wolves and the jackals
and the hyenas in all our section their tea
before I begins to ask them questions.
How do you mean ask them questions?
I queried, wishful to get him into a talkative humour.
Itn of them over the head
with a pole is one way,
scratching of their ears is another,
when Jens's flush wants a bit of shore for their gals.
I don't so much mind the fuss.
The itn of the pole part before I chucks in their dinner
but I awaits till they've had
their sherry and quaffy, so to speak,
before I tries on with the ears scratching.
Mind you, he added philosophically,
there's a deal of the same nature in us
as in them dear animals.
Here's you a common and arskin of me questions about my business
and I, the grump-like, that only for your
I'd have seen you bloat fuss before I'd answer.
Now even when you asked me me sarcastic-like,
if I'd like you to ask the superintendent
if you might ask me questions.
Without offence, did I tell you to go to hell?
You did.
And when you said you'd report me for using obscene language
that was itn me over the head.
But the arf quid made that all right.
I weren't going to fight
so I waited for the food
and did with my all as the wolves and lions and tigers does.
But, Lord, love your art.
Now that the old woman has stuck
a chunk of her tea cake in me
and rinsed me out with her bloomin' old teapot
and I've lit a hop,
you may scratch my ears for all your worth
and won't even get a growl out of me.
Drive along with your questions.
I know what you're coming at.
That ear escaped wolf.
Exactly, I want you to give me your view of it.
Just tell me how it happened
and when I know the facts, I'll get you to say
what you consider was the cause of it
and how you think the whole affair will end.
All right, Governor,
this ear's about the old story.
That ear wolf, what we call Bersiker,
was one of three grey ones that come from Norway
to Jamrocks,
which we bought off him four years ago.
He was a nice, well-behaved wolf
that never gave no trouble to talk of.
I'm more surprised at him
for one to get out
or any other animile in the place,
but there you can't trust wolves no more
nor women.
Don't you mind him, sir,
broke in Mrs. Tom with a cheery laugh.
He's got mind in the animiles
so long that blessed he ain't like an old wolf himself,
but there ain't no harm in him.
Well, sir, it was about
two hours after feeding yesterday
when I first ear my disturbance.
I was making up a litter with the monkey-house
for young Puma, which was ill,
but when I heard the yelping and howling,
I came way straight.
There was Bersiker, a tearing like a mad thing
at the bars if he wanted to get out.
There wasn't much people about that day,
and close at hand was only one man,
a tall, thin chap with a nook nose
and a pointed beard with a few white hairs
running through it.
He had a hard, cold look and red eyes,
and I took a sort of mislike to him,
for it seemed as if it was him
that was irritating that.
He had white kid gloves on, his hands,
and he pointed out to the animiles,
to me, and says, Keeper,
these wolves seem upset at something.
Maybe it's you, says I,
for I did not like the hairs as he'd give himself.
He didn't get angry, as I hoped he would,
but he smiled a kind of insolent smile
with a mouth full of white, sharp teeth.
Oh, no, they wouldn't like me, says.
Oh, yes, they would, says I,
imitating of him.
They always like a bone or two to clean their teeth
on about tea-time,
which you is a bagful.
Well, it was an odd thing,
but when the animiles sees us a-talking,
they lay down.
And when I went over to Bersicker,
he let me stroke his ears same as ever.
That there man came over and blessed,
but if he didn't put his hand in,
then stroke the old wolf's ears, too.
I care, says I, Bersicker is quick.
Never mind, he says, I'm used to him.
Are you in the business yourself, I says,
taking off my hat,
for a man what trades in wolves
and setterer is a good friend to keepers.
Norm, says he,
not exactly in the business,
but I have made pets of several.
And with that he lifts his hat,
as polite as a lord, and walks away.
Old Bersicker kept a-looking after him
till he was out of sight,
and then went and lay down in a corner,
and wouldn't come out the whole evening.
Well, last night, so soon as the moon was up,
the wolves here began all a-howling.
There warn't nothing for them to howl at.
There warn't no one near,
except someone that was evidently a-calling a dog
somewheres out back of the gardenings in the park road.
Once or twice I went out to see that all was all right,
and it was.
And then the owlin' stopped.
Just before twelve o'clock I just took a look round
before it turned in and bust me,
but when I came opposite the old Bersicker's cage,
I see the rails broken and twisted about the cage and empty.
And that's all I know for certain.
Did anyone else see anything?
One of our gardeners was a-coming home
about that time from Harmony,
when he sees a big grey dog
a-coming out through the gardening edges.
At least so he says, I don't give much for it myself.
For if he did, he never said a word about it
to his missus when he got home.
And it was only after the escape of the wolf
that was made known, and we'd been up all night
a-hunting of the park for Bersicker,
that he remembered seeing anything.
My own belief was that the Harmony
got in his head.
Now, Mr. Builder, can you account in any way
for the escape of the wolf?
Well, sir,
he said with a suspicious sort of modesty,
I think I can,
but I don't know as how you'd be satisfied
with the theory. Certainly I shall.
If a man like you, who knows the animals
from experience, can't hazard a good guess
at any rate, who is even to try?
Well then, sir,
I accounts for it this way.
It seems to me that
that there wolf escaped
simply because he wanted to get out.
From the hearty way that both Thomas
and his wife laughed at the joke,
I could see that it had done some service before,
and that the whole explanation was simply
an elaborate sell.
I couldn't cope in badnage with the worthy Thomas,
but I thought I knew a sure way to his heart.
So I said, now Mr. Builder will consider
that first half-sovereign worked off,
and this brother of his is waiting
to be claimed when you've told me what you think will happen.
Right you are, sir, he said briskly,
you'll excuse me, I know,
for a chaffin of ye, but the old woman here
winked at me, which was as much as telling me to go on.
Well, I never,
said the old lady.
My opinion is this, that there wolf
was hiding of somewheres.
The gardener, what, didn't remember, said he was a galloping
northward faster than a horse could go, but I don't believe him.
For ye see, sir, wolves don't gallop no more
and no dogs does.
They not being built that way.
Wolves just find things in a storybook,
and I dare say when they gets in packs and does be chivy
and something that's more of feared than they is,
they can make a devil of a noise and chop it up whatever it is.
But, Lord bless ye,
in real life a wolf is only a low creature,
not half so clever or bold as a good dog,
and not half a quarter so much fight in him.
This one ain't been used to fighting,
or even providing for his self.
More like he's somewhere round the park of hiding
and the shivering of, and if he thinks it all
he's still wondering where he's to get his breakfast from.
Or maybe he's got down some area
and is in a coal cellar.
My eye won't some cook get a rum start
when she sees his green eyes shining at her out of the dark.
If he can't get food he's bound to look for it,
and may have he made chance to light
on a butcher's shop in time.
If he doesn't, then some nursemaid goes out a walkin'
with a soldier leaving the infant in the purambulator.
Well, then I shouldn't be surprised
if the census is one baby the less.
That's all.
I was handing him the half-sovereign
when something came bobbing up against the window,
and Mr. Builder's face doubled its natural length with surprise.
God bless me, he said,
if there ain't old Bersicker come back by his self.
He went to the door and opened it,
a most unnecessary proceeding, it seemed to me.
I have always thought a wild animal
never looks so well as when some obstacle
of profound durability is between us.
A personal experience has intensified
rather than diminish that idea.
After all, however, there is nothing like custom,
for neither Builder nor his wife thought any more
of the wolf than I should of a dog.
The animal itself was as peaceful and well-behaved
as that father of all picture wolves,
Red Riding Hood's quantum friend,
whilst moving her confidence in masquerade.
The whole scene was an unutterable mixture
of comedy and pathos.
The wicked wolf that for a half day
had paralyzed London and set all the children in town
with a shivering in their shoes
was there in a sort of pentanent mood
and was received and petted
like a sort of vulpine prodigal son.
Old Builder examined him all over
with most tender solicitude,
and when he had finished with his pentanent said,
There, I knew the poor old chap
would get back into some kind of trouble.
Didn't I say it all along?
Here's his head all cut and full of broken glass.
He's been a-getting over some blooming wall or other.
It's a shame that people are allowed
to top their walls with broken bottles.
This here's what comes of it.
He took the wolf and locked him up in a cage
with a piece of meat that satisfied,
in quantity at any rate,
the elementary conditions of the fatted calf
and went off to report.
I came off, too, to report the only exclusive information
that is given today regarding the strange escapade at the zoo.
I was engaged after dinner in my study,
posting up my books which,
through press of other works,
and the many visits to Lucy
had fallen sadly into a rear.
Suddenly the door was burst open,
and in rushed my patient,
with his face distorted with passion.
I was thunderstruck for such a thing
as a patient getting of his own accord
into the superintendent's study is almost unknown.
Without an instant's notice he made straight at me.
He had a dinner knife in his hand,
and as I saw he was dangerous
I tried to keep the table between us.
He was too quick and too strong for me, however,
for before I could get my balance
he had struck at me and cut my left wrist rather severely.
Before he could strike again, however,
I got in my right hand,
and he was sprawling on his back on the floor.
My wrist bled freely,
and quite a little pool trickled onto the carpet.
I saw that my friend was not intent on further effort,
and occupied myself binding up my wrist,
keeping a wary eye on the prostrate figure all the time.
When the attendants rushed in,
and we turned our attention to him,
his employment positively sickened me.
He was lying on his belly on the floor,
licking up, like a dog,
the blood which had fallen from my wounded wrist.
He was easily secured,
and to my surprise went with the attendants quite placidly,
simply repeating over and over again,
the blood is the life, the blood is the life.
I cannot afford to lose blood just at present.
I have lost too much of late for my physical good,
and then the prolonged strain of Lucy's illness
and its horrible phases is telling on me.
I am overexcited and weary,
and I need rest, rest, rest.
Happily, Van Helsing has not summoned me,
so I need not forgo my sleep.
Tonight, I could not well do without it.
Telegram, Van Helsing, Antwerp to Seward, Carfax.
Sent to Carfax, Sussex,
as no county given, delivered late by twenty-two hours.
Seventeen September, stop.
Do not fail to be at Hillingham tonight, stop.
If not watching all the time, frequently visit,
and see that flowers are as placed.
Very important, do not fail, stop.
Shall be with you as soon as possible after arrival, stop.
Dr. Seward's Diary, 18 September.
Just off train to London.
The arrival of Van Helsing's Telegram filled me with dismay.
A whole night lost, and I know by bitter experience
what may happen in a night.
Of course it is possible that all may be well,
but what may have happened?
Surely there is some horrible doom hanging over us
that every possible accident should thwart us
in all we try to do.
I shall take the cylinder with me,
and then I can complete my entry on Lucy's phonograph.
Memorandum left by Lucy Wisterner.
Seventeen September, night.
I write this and leave it to be seen,
so that no one may by any chance get into trouble through me.
This is an exact record of what took place tonight.
I feel I am dying of weakness
and of barely enough strength to write,
but it must be done if I die in the doing.
I went to bed as usual,
taking care that the flowers were placed
as Dr. Van Helsing directed, and soon fell asleep.
I was waked by the flapping at the window,
which had begun after that sleepwalking
off the cliff at Whitby when Mina saved me,
and which now I know so well.
I was not afraid,
but I did wish that Dr. Seward was in the next room,
as Dr. Van Helsing said he would be,
so that I might have called him.
I tried to sleep, but I could not.
Then there came to me the old fear of sleep,
and I determined to keep awake.
Perversely, sleep would try to come then
when I did not want it.
So, as I feared to be alone, I opened my door
and called out, Is there anybody there?
There was no answer.
I was afraid to wake Mother, and so closed my door again.
Then outside in the shrubbery I heard a sort of howl
like a dog's, but more fierce and deeper.
I went to the window and looked out,
but could see nothing, except a big bat,
which had evidently been buffering its wings
against the window.
So I went back to bed again, but determined
not to go to sleep.
Presently the door opened and my Mother looked in.
Seeing by my moving that I was not asleep,
she came in and sat by me.
She said to me, even more sweetly and softly than her want,
I was uneasy about you, darling,
and came in to see that you were all right.
I feared she might catch cold sitting there
and asked her to come in and sleep with me,
so she came into bed and lay down beside me.
She did not take off her dressing gown,
for she said she would only stay a while
and then go back to her own bed.
As she lay there in my arms, and I in hers,
the flapping and buffeting came to the window again.
She was startled and a little frightened
and cried out, what is that?
I tried to pacify her and at last succeeded
and she lay quiet, but I could hear
her poor heart still beating terribly.
After a while there was a howl again out in the shrubbery,
and shortly after there was a crash at the window,
and a lot of broken glass was hurled on the floor.
The window blind blew back with the wind
that rushed in, and in the aperture of the broken panes
there was the head of a great, gaunt gray wolf.
Mother cried out in a fright
and struggled up into a sitting posture
and clutched wildly at anything that would help her.
Amongst other things she clutched the wreath of flowers
that Dr. Van Helsing insisted on my wearing
around my neck and tore it away from me.
For a second or two she sat up pointing at the wolf
and there was a strange and horrible gurgling in her throat.
Then she fell over as if struck with lightning
and her head hit my forehead and made me dizzy
for a moment or two.
The room and all around seemed to spin
around.
I kept my eyes fixed on the window, but the wolf drew his head back
and a whole myriad of little specks seems to come
blowing in through the broken window and wheeling
and circling round like the pillar of dust that the travelers
describe when there is a simoon in the desert.
I tried to stir, but there was some spell upon me
and dear mother's poor body, which seemed to grow cold
already, for her dear heart had ceased to beat,
weighed me down,
and I remembered no more for a while.
The time did not seem long,
but very, very awful,
till I recovered consciousness again.
Somewhere near a passing bell was tolling.
The dogs all around the neighborhood were howling
and in our shrubbery seeming just outside
a nightingale was singing.
I was dazed and stupid with pain and terror
and I could not speak.
I could not find weakness,
but the sound of the nightingale seemed like the voice
of my dead mother come back to comfort me.
The sound seemed to have awakened the maids too,
for I could hear their bare feet pattering outside my door.
I called to them and they came in,
and when they saw what had happened and what it was
that lay over me in the bed, they screamed.
The wind rushed in through the broken window
and the door slammed too.
They lifted off the body of my dear mother
and laid her, covered up with a sheet
on the bed after I had got up.
They were all so frightened and nervous
that I directed them to go to the dining room
and each have a glass of wine.
The door flew open for an instant and closed again.
The maids shrieked and then went in a body
to the dining room and I laid what flowers I had
on my dear mother's breast.
When they were there, I remembered what Dr. Van Helsing
had told me, but I didn't like to remove them.
And besides, I would have some of the servants
to sit up with me now.
I was surprised that the maids did not come back.
I called them, but got no answer.
So I went to the dining room to look for them.
My heart sank when I saw what happened.
They all four lay helpless on the floor,
breathing heavily.
The decanter of Sherry was on the table half full,
but there was a queer, acrid smell about.
I was suspicious and examined the decanter.
It smelt of laudanum.
And looking on the sideboard, I found that the bottle,
which mother's doctor uses for her,
oh, did use, was empty.
What am I to do? What am I to do?
I am back in the room with mother. I cannot leave her.
I am alone, save for the sleeping servants
whom someone has drugged, alone with the dead.
I dare not go out, for I can hear the low howl
of the wolf through the broken window.
The air seems full of specks
floating and circling in the draft from the window.
And the lights burn blue and dim.
What am I to do?
God shield me from harm this night.
I shall hide this paper in my breast,
where they shall find it when they come to lay me out.
My dear mother gone, it is time I go too.
Goodbye, dear Arthur,
if I should not survive this night.
God keep you dear,
and God help me.
XII Dr. Seward's Diary
18 September. I drove at once to Hillingham and arrived early. Keeping my cab at the gate,
I went up the avenue alone. I knocked gently and rang as quietly as possible,
for I feared to disturb Lucy or her mother, and hoped to only bring a servant to the door.
After a while, finding no response, I knocked and rang again, still no answer.
I cursed the laziness of the servants that they should lie a bed at such an hour,
for it was now ten o'clock, and so rang and knocked again, but more impatiently,
but still without response. Hitherto I had blamed only the servants,
but now a terrible fear began to assail me. Was this desolation but another link in the
chain of doom which seemed drawing tight around us? Was it indeed a house of death to which I had
come too late? I know that minutes, even seconds of delay, might mean hours of danger to Lucy,
if she had had again one of those frightful relapses, and I went round the house to try
if I could find by chance an entry anywhere. I could find no means of ingress. Every window
and door was fastened and locked, and I returned baffled to the porch. As I did so,
I heard the rapid pit pat of a swiftly driven horse's feet. They stopped at the gate,
and a few seconds later I met Van Helsing running up the avenue. When he saw me,
he gasped out. Then it was you, and just arrived. How is she? Are we too late? Did you not get my
telegram? I answered as quickly and coherently as I could that I had only got his telegram early
in the morning, and had not a minute in coming here, and that I could not make anyone in the
house hear me. He paused and raised his hat as he said solemnly, then I fear we are too late.
God's will be done. With his usual recuperative energy, he went on,
Come, if there be no way open to get in, we must make one. Time is all in all to us now.
We went round to the back of the house, where there was a kitchen window. The professor took
a small surgical saw from his case, and handing it to me, pointed to the iron bars which guarded
the window. I attacked them at once, and had very soon cut through three of them. Then,
with a long thin knife, we pushed back the fastening of the sashes, and opened the window.
I helped the professor in, and followed him. There was no one in the kitchen or in the servants' rooms,
which were close at hand. We tried all the rooms as we went along, and in the dining room,
dimly lit by rays of light through the shutters, found four servant women lying on the floor.
There was no need to think them dead, for their stertuous breathing and the acrid smell of laudanum
in the room left no doubt as to their condition. Van Helsing and I looked at each other, and as we
moved away, he said, we can attend to them later. Then we ascended to Lucy's room. For an instant or
two, we paused at the door to listen, but there was no sound that we could hear. With white faces
and trembling hands, we opened the door gently, and entered the room. How shall I describe what
we saw? On the bed lay two women, Lucy and her mother. The latter lay farthest in, and she was
covered with a white sheet, the edge of which had been blown back by the draught through the broken
window, showing the drawn white face with a look of terror fixed upon it. By her side lay Lucy with
a face white and still more drawn. The flowers which had been round her neck we found upon her
mother's bosom, and her throat was bare, showing the two little wounds which we had noticed before,
but looking horribly white and mangled. Without a word, the professor bent over the bed, his head
almost touching poor Lucy's breast. Then he gave a quick turn of his head, as of one who listens,
and leaping to his feet, he cried out to me, it's not yet too late. Quick, quick, bring the brandy.
I flew downstairs and returned with it, taking care to smell and taste it lest it too were drugged,
like the decanter of Sherry which I had found on the table. The maids were still breathing,
but more restlessly, and I fancied that the narcotic was wearing off. I did not stay to make
sure, but returned to Van Helsing. He rubbed the brandy, as on another occasion, on her lips and
gums, and on her wrists and the palms of her hands. He said to me, I can do this, all that can be at
the present. You go wake those maids, flick them in the face with a wet towel, and flick them hard,
make them get heat and fire and a warm bath. This poor soul is nearly as cold as that cider. She will
need be heated before we can do anything more. I went at once and found little difficulty in
waking three of the women. The fourth was only a young girl, and the drug had evidently affected
her more strongly, so I lifted her on the sofa and let her sleep. The others were dazed at first,
but as remembrance came back to them, they cried and sobbed in a hysterical manner.
I was stern with them, however, and would not let them talk. I told them that one life was bad enough
to lose, and if they delayed, they would sacrifice Miss Lucy. So, sobbing and crying, they went about
their way, half-clad as they were, and prepared fire and water. Fortunately, the kitchen and boiler
were still alive, and there was no lack of hot water. We got a bath and carried Lucy out, as she
was, and placed her in it. Whilst we were busy chafing her limbs, there was a knock at the hall
door. One of the maids ran off, hurried, on some more clothes, and opened it. Then she returned and
whispered to us that there was a gentleman who had come with a message from Mr. Holmwood.
I bade her simply tell him that he must wait, for we could see no one now.
She went away with a message, and engrossed with her work, I clean forgot all about him.
I never saw in all my experience the professor work in such deadly earnest. I knew, as he knew,
that it was a stand-up fight with death, and in a pause told him so. He answered me in a way that
I did not understand, but with the sternest look that his face could wear. If that were all,
I would stop here, where we are now, and let her fade away into peace, for I see no light in life
over her horizon. He went on with his work with, if possible, renewed and more frenzied vigor.
Presently, we both began to be conscious that the heat was beginning to be of some effect.
Lucy's heart beat a trifle more audibly to the stethoscope, and her lungs had a perceptible
movement. Van Helsing's face almost beamed, and as we lifted her from the bath and rolled her in a
hot sheet dryer, he said to me, the first gain is ours. Check to the king. We took Lucy into
another room, which had by now been prepared, and laid her in bed and forced a few drops of
brandy down her throat. I noticed that Van Helsing tied a soft, silk handkerchief round her throat.
She was still unconscious, and was quite as bad as, if not worse than, we had ever seen her.
Van Helsing called in one of the women and told her to stay with her and not take her eyes off
her till we returned, and then beckoned me out of the room. We must consult as to what is to be done.
He said as we descended the stairs. In the hall he opened the dining room door. As we passed in,
he closing the door carefully behind him. The shutters had been opened, but the blinds were
already down, with that obedience to the etiquette of death, which the British woman of the lower
classes always rigidly observes. The room was, therefore, dimly dark. It was, however, light
enough for our purposes. Van Helsing's sternness was somewhat relieved by a look of perplexity.
He was evidently torturing his mind about something, so I waited for an instant, and he spoke.
What are we to do now? Where are we to turn for help? We must have another transfusion of blood,
and that's soon, or that poor girl's life won't be worth an hour's purchase.
You are exhausted already. I am exhausted, too. I fear to trust those women, even if they would
have courage to submit. What are we to do for someone who will open his veins for her?
What's the matter with me, anyhow? The voice came from the sofa across the room, and its tones
brought relief and joy to my heart, for they were those of Quincy Morris.
Van Helsing started angrily at the first stound, but his face softened, and a glad look came into
his eyes as I cried out, Quincy Morris, and rushed towards him with outstretched hands.
What brought you here? I cried as our hands met. I guess art is the cause.
He handed me a telegram. Have not heard from Seward for three days. Am terribly anxious. Stop.
Cannot leave. Stop. Father's still in same condition. Stop.
Send me word. How loose he is. Stop. Do not delay. Stop. Homeward.
I think I came just in the nick of time. You know you have only to tell me what to do.
Van Helsing strode forward and took his hand, looking him straight in the eyes, and he said,
A brave man's blood is the best thing on this earth when a woman is in trouble.
You are a man and no mistake. Well, the devil may work against us for all he's worth,
but God sends us men when we want them. Once again we went through that ghastly operation.
I have not the heart to go through with the details. Lucy had got a terrible shock and
had told on her more than before, for though plenty of blood went into her veins, her body
did not respond to the treatment as well as on the other occasions. Her struggle back into life was
something frightful to see and hear, however the action of both heat and lungs improved,
and Van Helsing made a subcutaneous injection of Morphea as before and with good effect.
Her faint became a profound slumber. The professor watched whilst I went downstairs with Quincy
Morris and set one of the maids to pay off one of the cabin who were waiting.
I left Quincy lying down after having a glass of wine and told the cook to get ready a good
breakfast. Then a thought struck me, and I went back to the room where Lucy was now.
When I came softly in, I found Van Helsing with a sheet or two of no paper in his hand.
He had evidently read it and was thinking it over as he sat with his hand to his brow.
There was a look of grim satisfaction in his face as of one who has had a doubt solved.
He handed me the paper, saying only it dropped from Lucy's breast when we carried her to the bath.
When I had read it, I stood looking at the professor, and after a pause,
I asked him, in God's name, what does it all mean? Was she or is she mad? What sort of horrible
danger is it? I was so bewildered that I did not know what to say any more.
Van Helsing put out his hand and took the paper, saying,
Do not trouble about it now. Forget it for the present. You shall know and understand in all
good time, but it will be later. And now, what is it that you came to me to say?
This brought me back to fact, and I was all myself again.
I came to speak about the certificate of death. If we do not act properly and wisely,
there may be an inquest, and that paper would have to be produced. I am in hopes that we need
have no inquest, for if we had it, it would surely kill poor Lucy if nothing else did.
I know, and you know, and the other doctor who attended her knows, that Mrs. Westernra
had disease of the heart, and we can certify that she died of it.
Let us fill up the certificate at once, and I shall take it myself to the registrar,
and go on to the undertaker.
Good, oh, my friend John, well thought of. Truly Miss Lucy, if she be sad in the foes of that
besetter, is at least very happy in the friends that love her. One, two, three, all open their
veins for her, besides one old man. Ah, yes, I know, friend John, I am not blind.
I love you all the more for it. Now go.
In the hall, I met Quincy Morris with a telegram from Arthur,
telling him that Mrs. Westernra was dead, that Lucy also had been ill, was now going on better,
and that Van Helsing and I were with her. I told him where I was going, and he hurried me out.
But as I was going, said, When you come back, Jack, may I have two words with you,
all to ourselves? I nodded in reply, and went out.
I found no difficulty about the registration, and arranged with the local undertaker to come
up in the evening to measure for the coffin, and to make arrangements.
When I got back, Quincy was waiting for me.
I told him I would see him as soon as I knew about Lucy, and went up to her room.
She was still sleeping, and the professor seemingly had not moved from his seat at her side.
From his putting his finger to his lips, I gathered that he expected her to wake
up before long, and was afraid of forestalling nature.
So I went down to Quincy, and took him into the breakfast room, where the blinds were not drawn
down, and which was a little more cheerful, or rather less cheerless than the other rooms.
When we were alone, he said to me, Jack Seward, I don't want to shove myself in anywhere where
I have no right to be, but this is no ordinary case. You know I love that girl, and wanted to marry her.
But although that's all past and gone, I can't help feeling anxious about her all the same.
What is it that's wrong with her? The Dutchman, and a fine old fellow he is, I can see that.
Said that time you two came into the room, that you must have another transfusion of blood,
and that both you and he were exhausted. Now I know well that you medical men speak in camera,
and that a man must not expect to know what they consult about in private.
But this is no common matter, and whatever it is, I have done my part. Is that not so?
That is so, I said, and he went on.
I take it that both you and Van Helsing have done already what I did today. Is that not so?
That's so. And I guess Art was in it too. When I saw him four days ago down at his place, he looked
queer. I've not seen anything pulled down so quick since I was on the pompous, and had a mare that I
was fond of go to grass all in the night. One of those big bats that they call vampires had got her
in the night, and what with his gorge and the vein left open, there wasn't enough blood in her to let
her stand up, and I had to put a bullet through her as she lay. Jack, if you may tell me, without
betraying confidence, Arthur was the first. Is not that so? As he spoke, the poor fellow looked
terribly anxious. He was in a torture of suspense regarding the woman he loved, and his utter
ignorance of the terrible mystery which seemed to surround her intensified his pain. His very heart
was bleeding, and it took all the manhood of him, but there was a royal lot of it too to keep him
from breaking down. I paused before answering, for I felt that I must not betray anything which the
professor wished kept secret. But already he knew so much, and guessed so much, that there could be
no reason for not answering. So I answered in the same phrase. That's so. And how long has this been
going on? About ten days. Ten days? Then I guess, Jack Seward, that that poor pretty creature that we
all love has put into her veins within that time the blood of four strong men. Man alive, her whole
body wouldn't hold it. Then coming close to me, he spoke in a fierce half whisper. What took it out?
I shook my head. That, I said, is the crux. Van Helsing is simply frantic about it, and I'm at my
wit's end. I can't even hazard a guess. There's been a series of little circumstances which have
thrown out all our calculations as to Lucy being properly watched. But these shall not occur again.
Here we stay until all be well, or ill.
Quincy held out his hand. Count me in, he said. You and the Dutchman will tell me what to do,
and I'll do it. When she woke late in the afternoon, Lucy's first movement was to feel in her
breast, and to my surprise produced the paper which Van Helsing had given me to read. The careful
professor had replaced it where it had come from, lest on waking she should be alarmed.
Her eyes then lit on Van Helsing, and on me too, and gladdened. Then she looked round the room,
and seeing where she was, shuddered. She gave a loud cry, and put her poor thin hands before her
pale face. We both understood what was meant, that she had realized to the full her mother's death.
So we tried what we could to comfort her. Doubtless, sympathy eased her somewhat,
but she was very low in thought and spirit, and wept silently and weakly for a long time.
We told her that either or both of us would now remain with her all the time,
and that seemed to comfort her. Towards dusk she fell into a doze.
Here a very odd thing occurred. While still asleep she took the paper from her breast and
tore it in two. Van Helsing stepped over and took the pieces from her. All the same, however,
she went on with the action of tearing, as though the material were still in her hands.
Finally she lifted her hands and opened them, as though scattering the fragments.
Van Helsing seemed surprised, and his brows gathered as if in thought. But he said nothing.
19 September. All last night she slept fitfully, being always afraid to sleep,
and something weaker when she woke from it. The professor and I took turns to watch,
and we never left her for a moment unattended. Quincy Morris said nothing about his intention,
but I knew that all night long he patrolled round and round the house.
When the day came, its searching light showed the ravages in poor Lucy's strength.
She was hardly able to turn her head, and the little nourishment which she could take
seemed to do her no good. At times she slept, and both Van Helsing and I noticed a difference in her
between sleeping and waking. Whilst asleep she looked stronger, although more haggard,
and her breathing was softer. Her open mouth showed pale gums drawn back from the teeth,
which looked positively longer and sharper than usual.
When she woke, the softness of her eyes evidently changed the expression,
for she looked her own self, although a dying one.
In the afternoon she asked for Arthur, and we telegraphed for him.
Quincy went off to meet him at the station.
When he arrived, it was nearly six o'clock, and the sun was setting full and warm,
and the red light streamed in through the window, and gave more colour to the pale cheeks.
When he saw her, Arthur was simply choking with emotion, and none of us could speak.
In the hours that had passed, the fits of sleep, or the comatose condition that passed for it,
had grown more and more frequent, so that the pauses when the conversation was possible
were shortened. Arthur's presence, however, seemed to act as a stimulant.
She rallied a little, and spoke to him more brightly than she had done since we arrived.
He too pulled himself together, and spoke as cheerily as he could,
so that the best was made of everything.
It is now nearly one o'clock, and he and Van Helsing are sitting with her.
I am to relieve them in a quarter of an hour, and I am entering this on Lucy's phonograph.
Until six o'clock, they are to try to rest. I fear that tomorrow
will end our watching, for the shock has been too great. The poor child cannot rally. God help us all.
Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Resternra. Unopened by her. 17 September.
My dearest Lucy, it seems an age since I had heard from you,
or indeed since I wrote. You will pardon me, I know, for all my faults when you have read
all my budget of news. Well, I got my husband back all right.
When we arrived at Exeter, there was a carriage waiting for us, and in it,
though he had an attack of gout, Mr. Hawkins. He took us to his house,
where there were rooms for us all nice and comfortable, and we dined together.
After dinner, Mr. Hawkins said,
My dears, I want to drink to your health and prosperity,
and may every blessing attend you both. I know you both from children and have,
with love and pride, seen you grow up. Now I want you to make your home here with me.
I have left me neither chick nor child, all are gone, and in my will I have left you everything.
I cried, Lucy dear, as Jonathan and the old man clasped hands. Our evening was a very, very happy
one. So here we are, installed in this beautiful old house, and from both my bedroom and the
drawing room, I can see the great elms of the cathedral close, with their great black stems
standing out against the old yellow stone of the cathedral, and I can hear the rooks overhead,
calling and calling and chattering and chattering and gossiping all day,
after the manner of rooks and humans. I am busy, I need not tell you,
arranging things and housekeeping. Jonathan and Mr. Hawkins are busy all day.
For now that Jonathan is a partner, Mr. Hawkins wants to tell him all about the clients.
How is your dear mother getting on? I wish I could run up to town for a day or two to see you, dear,
but I dare not go yet, with so much on my shoulders, and Jonathan wants looking after still.
He's beginning to put some flesh on his bones again, but he was terribly weakened by the long
illness. Even now he sometimes starts out of his sleep in a sudden way and awakens all trembling
until I can coax him back to his usual placidity. However, thank God these occasions grow less
frequent as the days go on, and they will in time pass away altogether, I trust.
And now I have told you my news, let me ask yours. When are you to be married and where,
and who is to perform the ceremony, and what are you to wear, and is it to be a public or
private wedding? Tell me all about it, dear, tell me about everything, for there's nothing
which interests you which will not be dear to me. Jonathan asked me to send his respectful duty,
but I do not think that is good enough for the junior partner of the important firm Hawkins and
Harker. And so, as you love me, and he loves me, and I love you with all the moods and tenses of
the verb, I send you simply his love instead. Goodbye, my dearest Lucy, and blessings on you.
Yours, Mina Harker.
Et cetera, et cetera. To John Seward, M.D. 20 September.
My dear sir, in accordance with your wishes, I enclose report of the conditions of everything
left in my charge. With regard to the patient Renfield, there's more to say. He's had another
outbreak, which might have had a dreadful ending, but which, as fortunately happened, was unattended
with any unhappy results. This afternoon, a carrier's cart with two men made a call at
the empty house whose grounds abut on ours, the house to which, you will remember, the patient
twice ran away. The men stopped at our gate to ask the porter their way, as they were strangers.
I was myself looking out of the study window, having a smoke after dinner, and saw one of them
come up to the house. As he passed the window of Renfield's room, the patient began to rate
him from the within, and called him all the foul names he could lay his tongue to.
The man, who seemed a decent fellow enough, contented himself by telling him to shut up
for a foul-mouthed beggar, whereupon our man accused him of robbing him and wanting to murder
him, and said that he would hinder him if he were to swing for it. I opened the window and signed
the man not to notice, so he contented himself, after looking the place over and making up his
mind as to what kind of place he had got to, by saying,
Lord bless you, sir, I wouldn't mind what was said to me in a blooming madhouse.
I pity ye in the governor for having to live in the house with a wild beast like that.
Then he asked his way civilly enough, and I told him where the gate of the empty house was.
He went away, followed by threats and curses and revilings from our man.
I went down to see if I could make out any cause for his anger, since he is usually such a well
behaved man, and except his violent fits nothing of the kind had ever occurred.
I found him, to my astonishment, quite composed and most genial in his manner.
I tried to get him to talk of the incident, but he blandly asked me questions as to what I meant,
and led me to believe that he was completely oblivious of the affair.
It was, I am sorry to say, however, only another instance of his cunning, for within half an hour
I heard of him again. This time he had broken out through the window of his room and was running
down the avenue. I called for the attendants to follow me and ran after him, for I feared he was
intent on some mischief. My fear was justified when I saw the same cart which had passed before
coming down the road, having on it some great wooden boxes. The men were wiping their feet
foreheads and were flushed in the face as if with violent exercise. Before I could get up to him,
the patient rushed at them, and pulling one of them off the cart began to knock his head against
the ground. If I had not seized him just at the moment, I believe he would have killed the man
then and there. The other fellow jumped down and struck him over the head with the butt end of his
heavy whip. It was a horrible blow, but he did not seem to mind it, but seized him also and struggled
with the three of us, pulling us to and fro as if we were kittens. You know I am no lightweight,
and the others were both burly men. At first he was silent in his fighting, but as we began to master
him and the attendants were putting a straight waistcoat on him, he began to shout, I'll frustrate
them. They shan't rob me. They shan't rob and murder me by inches. I'll fight for my lord and master.
And all sorts of similar incoherent ravings. It was with very considerable difficulty that they
got him back to the house and put him in a padded room. One of the attendants, Hardy,
had a finger broken. However, I said it all right, and he is going well.
The two carriers were at first loud in their threats of actions for damages and promised to
rain down all the penalties of the law on us. Their threats were, however, mingled with some
indirect apology for the defeat of the two of them by a feeble madman. They said that it had not been
for the way their strength had been spent in carrying and raising the heavy boxes.
To the cart they would have made a short work of him. They gave as another reason for their defeat
the extraordinary state of drought to which they had been reduced by the dusty nature of their
occupation and the reprehensible distance from the scene of their labors of any place of public
entertainment. I quite understood their drift, and after a stiff glass of strong grog,
or rather more of the same, and with each a sovereign in their hand, they made light of
the attack and swore that they would encounter worse madmen any day for the pleasure of meeting
so gloom and a good bloke as your correspondent. I took their names and addresses in case they
be needed. They are as follows. Jack Smollett of Deadling's Rent, King George's Road, Great
Walworth, and Thomas Snelling, Peter Farley's Row, Guide Court, Bethnal Green. They are both
in the employment of Harrison Sons, Moving and Shipment Company, Orange Master's Yard, Soho.
I shall report to you any matter of interest occurring here, and shall wire you at once if
there is anything of importance. Believe me, dear sir. Yours faithfully, Patrick Hennessey.
Letter, Mina Harkner to Lucy Wisternera. Unopened by her. 18 September.
My dearest Lucy, such a sad blow has befallen us. Mr. Hawkins has died very suddenly. Some may not
think it so sad for us, but we had both come to so love him that it really seems as though we had
lost a father. I never knew either father or mother, so that the dear old man's death is a
real blow to me. Jonathan is greatly distressed. It is not only that he feels sorrow, deep sorrow,
for the dear, good man who has befriended him all his life, and now at the end has treated him like
his own son and left him a fortune to which people of our modest bringing up his wealth beyond a
dream of avarice, but Jonathan feels it on another account. He says the amount of responsibility which
puts upon him makes him nervous. He begins to doubt himself. I try to cheer him up, but my
belief in him helps him to have a belief in himself. But it is here that the grave shock
that he experienced tells upon him the most. Oh, it is too hard that a sweet, simple, noble,
strong nature such as his, a nature which enabled him by our dear good friend's aid to rise from
clerk to master in a few years, should be so injured that the very essence of his strength is gone.
Forgive me, dear, if I worry you with my troubles in the midst of your own happiness,
but, Lucy dear, I must tell someone, for the strain of keeping up a brave and cheerful
appearance to Jonathan tires me, and I have no one here that I can confide in. I dread coming
up to London, as we must do the day after tomorrow, for poor Mr. Hawkins left in his will that he was
to be buried in the grave with his father. As there are no relations at all, Jonathan will
have to be chief mourner. I shall try to run over to see you, dearest, if only for a few minutes.
Forgive me for troubling you. With all blessings, your loving, Mina Harker.
Dr. Seward's Diary, 20 September. Only resolution and habit can let me make an entry tonight.
I am too miserable, too low-spirited, too sick of the world and all in it, including life itself,
that I would not care if I heard this moment the flapping of the wings of the angel of death.
And he has been flapping those grim wings to some purpose of late, Lucy's mother and Arthur's
father, and now let me get on with my work. I duly relieved Van Helsing in his watch over Lucy.
We wanted Arthur to go and to rest also, but he refused at first. It was only when I told him
that we should want him to help us during the day, and that we must not all break down for want of
rest, lest Lucy should suffer, that he agreed to go. Van Helsing was very kind to him. Come,
my child, he said. Come with me. You are sick and weak, and have had such sorrow and much mental
pain, as well as that tax on your strength that we know of. You must not be alone, for to be alone
is to be full of fears and alarms. Come to the drawing room, where there is a big fire,
and there are two sofas. You shall lie on one, and I on the other, and our sympathy will be
comfort to each other, even though we do not speak, even if we sleep. Arthur went off with
him casting back a longing look on Lucy's face, which lay in her pillow, almost wider than the
lawn. She lay quiet and still, and I looked round the room to see that all was as it should be.
I could see that the Professor had carried out in this room, as in others, his purpose of using
the garlic. The whole of the window sashes reeked with it, and round Lucy's neck over the silk
handkerchief in which Van Helsing made her keep on was a rough chaplet of the same odorous flowers.
Lucy was breathing somewhat stirtuously, and her face was at its worst, for the open mouth showed
pale gums. Her teeth in the dim, uncertain light seemed longer and sharper than they had been in
the morning. In particular, by some trick of the light, the canine teeth looked longer and sharper
than the rest. I sat down beside her, and presently she moved uneasily. At the same moment, there came
a sort of dull flapping or buffeting at the window. I went over to it softly and peeped out
by the corner of the blind. There was full moonlight, and I could see that the noise was
made by a great bat which wheeled round, doubtless attracted by the light, although so dim, and every
now and again struck the window with its wings. When I came back to my seat, I found that Lucy had
moved slightly, and had torn away the garlic flowers from her throat. I replaced them as well
as I could, and sat watching her. Presently she woke, and I gave her food, as Van Helsing had
the unconscious struggle for life, and the strength that had hitherto marked her illness.
It struck me as curious that the moment she became conscious, she pressed the garlic flowers
close to her. It was certainly odd that whatever she got into that lethargic state, with this
dirtuous breathing, she put the flowers from her, but that when she waked, she clutched them close.
There was no possibility of making any mistake about this, for in the long hours that followed,
she had many spells of sleeping and waking, and repeated both actions many times.
At six o'clock, Van Helsing came to relieve me. Arthur had then fallen into a doze, and
immersively let him sleep on. When he saw Lucy's face, I could hear the hissing indraw of breath,
and he said to me in a sharp whisper, Drop the blind, I want light. Then he bent down,
with his face almost touching Lucy's, examined her carefully. He removed the flowers and lifted
the silk handkerchief from her throat. As he did so, he started back, and I could hear his
ejaculation. My God! It was smothered in his throat. I bent over and looked too, and as I noticed some
queer chill came over me. The wounds on her throat had absolutely disappeared.
For fully five minutes, Van Helsing stood looking at her, with his face at its sternest.
Then he turned to me and said calmly, She is dying. It will not be long now. It will be much
difference, mark me, whether she dies, conscious or in her sleep. Wake that poor boy, and let him
come to see the last. He trusts us, and we have promised him. I went to the dining room, and
he was dazed for a moment, but when he saw the sunlight streaming in through the edges of the
shutters, he thought he was late and expressed his fear. I assured him that Lucy was still asleep,
but told him as gently as I could that both Van Helsing and I feared that the end was near.
He covered his face with his hands and slid down on his knees by the sofa, where he remained,
perhaps a minute, with his head buried, praying, whilst his shoulders shook with grief.
I took him by the hand and raised him up. Come, I said, my dear old fellow, summon all your
fortitude. It will be best and easiest for her. When we came into Lucy's room, I could see that
Van Helsing had, with his usual forethought, been putting matters straight and making everything
look as pleasing as possible. He had even brushed Lucy's hair so that it lay on the pillow in its
usual, sunny ripples. When we came into the room, she opened her eyes, and seeing him,
she whispered softly, Arthur, oh, my love, I am so glad you have come. He was stooping to kiss her
when Van Helsing motioned him back. No, he whispered, not yet. Hold her hand, it will comfort
her more. So Arthur took her hand and knelt beside her, and she looked her best, with all the soft
lines matching the angelic beauty of her eyes. Then gradually her eyes closed, and she sank to
sleep. For a little bit, her breast heaved softly, and her breath came and went like a tired child's.
And then, insensibly, there came the strange change which I had noticed in the night.
Her breathing grew sturtuous. The mouth opened, and the pale gums drawn back made the teeth look
longer and sharper than ever. In a sort of sleep-waking, vague, unconscious way, she opened
her eyes, which were now dull and hard at once, and she said in a soft, voluptuous voice such as
I had never heard from her lips, Arthur, oh, my love, I am so glad you have come. Kiss me.
Arthur bent eagerly over to kiss her, but at that instant Van Helsing, who, like me, had been
startled by her voice, swooped upon him and, catching him by the neck with both hands, dragged
him back with a fury of strength which I had never thought he could have possessed, and actually
hurled him almost across the room. Not on your life, he said, not for your living soul and hers,
and he stood between them like a lion at bay. Arthur was so taken aback that he did not for a
moment know what to do or say, and before any impulse of violence could seize him, he realized
the place and the occasion and stood silent, waiting. I kept my eyes fixed on Lucy as did Van
Helsing, and we saw a spasm as of rage flit like a shadow over her face. The sharp teeth clamped
together. Her eyes closed, and she breathed heavily. Very shortly after, she opened her
eyes in all their softness, and putting out her poor, pale, thin hand, took Van Helsing's great
brown one, drawing it close to her. She kissed it. My true friend, she said in a faint voice,
but with untellable pathos. My true friend and his. Oh, guard him, and give me peace.
I swear it, he said solemnly, kneeling beside her and holding up his hand as one who registers
an oath. Then he turned to Arthur and said to him, come, my child, take her hand in yours
and kiss her on the forehead. And only once. Their eyes met instead of their lips, and so they parted.
Lucy's eyes closed, and Van Helsing, who had been watching closely, took Arthur's arm and
drew him away. And then Lucy's breathing became stertuous again, and all at once it ceased.
It's all over, said Van Helsing. She's dead. I took Arthur by the arm and led him to the drawing
room, where he sat down and covered his face with his hands, sobbing in a way that nearly broke me
down to see. I went back to the room and found Van Helsing, looking at poor Lucy, and his face was
sterner than ever. Some change had come over her body. Death had given back part of her beauty for
brow and cheeks had recovered some of their flowing lines. Even the lips had lost their
deadly pallor. It was as if the blood, no longer needed for the working of the heart, had gone to
make the harshness of death as little rude as might be. We thought her dying while she slept,
and sleeping while she died. I stood beside Van Helsing and said, ah well, poor girl,
there's peace for her at last. It is the end. He turned to me and said with a grave solemnity,
not so, alas, not so. It is only the beginning. When I asked him what he meant, he only shook
his head and answered, we can do nothing as yet. Wait and see.
BY BRAM STOKER
Dr. Seward's Diary
CONTINUED
The funeral was arranged for the next succeeding day, so that Lucy and her mother might be
buried together.
I attended to all the ghastly formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his
staff was afflicted or blessed with something of his own ubiquitous suavity.
Even the woman who performed the last offices for the dead remarked to me in a confidential,
brother-professional way when she had come out from the death chamber.
She makes a very beautiful corpse, sir.
It's quite a privilege to attend on her.
It's not too much to say that she will do credit to our establishment.
I noticed that Van Helsing never kept far away.
This was possible from the disordered state of things in the household.
There were no relatives at hand, and as Arthur had to be back the next day to attend at his
father's funeral, we were unable to notify anyone who should have been bitten.
Under the circumstances, Van Helsing and I took it upon ourselves to examine papers—except.
He insisted upon looking over Lucy's papers himself.
I asked him why, for I feared that he, being a foreigner, might not be quite aware of English
legal requirements, and so might an ignorance make some unnecessary trouble.
He answered me, I know, I know.
You forget that I am a lawyer as well as a doctor, but this is not altogether for the law.
You knew that when you avoided the coroner.
I have more than him to avoid.
There may be papers more, such as this.
As he spoke, he took from his pocket-book the memorandum which had been in Lucy's breast
and which she had torn in her sleep.
When you find anything of the solicitors for the late Mrs. Westerna, seal all her papers
and write him to-night.
For me I watch here in the room and in Miss Lucy's old room all night, and I myself search
for what may be.
It is not well that her very thoughts go into the hands of strangers.
I went on with my part of the work, and in another half-hour had found the name and address
of Mrs. Westerna's solicitor I had written to him.
All the poor lady's papers were in order.
Explicit directions regarding the place of the burial were given.
I had hardly sealed the letter when, to my surprise, Van Helsing walked into the room
saying,
Can I help you, friend John?
I am free, and if I may, my service is to you.
Have you got what you looked for?
I asked.
To which he replied,
I did not look for any specific thing.
I only hope to find, and find I have, all that there was.
Only some letters, and a few memoranda, and a diary, new begun.
But I have them here, and we shall for the present say nothing of them.
I shall see that poor lad to-morrow evening, and, with his sanction, I shall use some.
When we had finished the work in hand he said to me,
And now, friend John, I think we may to bed.
We want sleep, both you and I, and rest to recuperate.
To-morrow we shall have much to do, but for to-night there is no need of us, alas.
Before turning in we went to look at poor Lucy.
The undertaker had certainly done his work well, for the room was turned into a small
chapela d'ante.
There was a wilderness of beautiful white flowers, and death was made as little repulsive
as might be.
The end of the winding sheet was laid over the face.
When the professor bent over and turned it gently back we both started at the beauty
before us, the tall wax candle showing a sufficient light to note it well.
All Lucy's loveliness had come back to her in death, and the hours that had passed, instead
of leaving traces of decays of facing fingers, had but restored the beauty of life, till
positively I could not believe my eyes that I was looking at a corpse.
The professor looked sternly grave.
He had not loved her as I had, and there was no need for tears in his eyes.
He said to me, Remain till I return, and left the room.
He came back with a handful of wild garlic from the box waiting in the hall, but which
had not been opened, and placed the flowers amongst the others on and around the bed.
Then he took from his neck, inside his collar, a little gold crucifix, and placed it over
the mouth.
He restored the sheet to its place, and we came away.
I was undressing in my own room when, with a prementory tap at the door, he entered,
and at once began to speak.
Tomorrow I want you to bring me, before night, a set of post-mortem knives.
Must we make an autopsy? I asked.
Yes, and no. I want to operate, but not what you think. Let me tell you now, but not a
word to another. I want to cut off her head and take out her heart.
Ah, you are a surgeon so shocked. You whom I have seen with no tremble of hand or heart,
do operations of life and death that make the rest shudder.
Oh, but I must not forget, my dear friend John, that you loved her, and have not forgotten
it for his eye that shall operate, and you must not help. I would like to do it to-night,
but for Arthur I must not. He will be free after his father's funeral tomorrow, and he
will want to see her, to see it. Then when she is coffined ready for the next day, you
and I shall come when all asleep. We shall unscrew the coffin lid and shall do our operation
and then replace all, so that none know, save we alone.
But why do it at all? The girl is dead. Why mutilate her poor body without need? If there
is no necessity for a post-mortem and nothing to gain by it, no good to her, to us, to science,
to human knowledge, why do it? Without such it is monstrous.
For answer he put his hand on my shoulder and said, with infinite tenderness, Friend
John, I pity your poor bleeding heart, and I love you the more because it does so bleed.
If I could I would take on myself the burden that you do bear. But there are things that
you know not, but that you shall know, and bless me for knowing, though they are not
pleasant things. John, my child, you have been my friend now
how many years, and yet did you ever know me to do any without good cause? I may err,
I am but a man, but I believe in all I do. Was it not for these causes that you sent
for me when the great trouble came? Yes, were you not amazed, nay horrified, when I would
not let Arthur kiss his love, though she was dying, and snatched him away by all my strength?
Yes, and yet you saw how she thanked me with her so beautiful dying eyes, her voice, too,
so weak, and she kissed my rough old hand and blessed me? Yes, and did you not hear
me swear a promise to her that so she closed her eyes grateful? Yes.
Well, I have good reason now for all I want to do. You have for many years, trust me.
You have, believe me, weeks past, when there be things so strange that you might have welled
out. Believe me yet a little, friend John, if you trust me not that I must think what
I think, and that is not perhaps well, and if I work as work I shall, no matter trust
or no trust, without my friend trust in me I work with heavy heart, and feel oh so lonely
when I want all help and courage that may be.
He paused a moment and went on solemnly, friend John, there are strange and terrible
days before us, let us not be two but one, that so we work to a good end, will you not
have faith in me?
I took his hand and promised him, I held my door open as I went away and watched him go
to his room and close the door, as I stood without moving I saw one of the maids pass
silently along the passage, she had her back to me, so did not see me, and go into the
room where Lucy lay. The sight touched me, devotion is so rare, and we are so grateful
to those who show it unasked to those we love, here was a poor girl putting aside the terrors
which she naturally had of death, to go watch alone by the beer of the mistress whom she
had loved, so that the poor clay might not be lonely till laid to eternal rest.
I must have slept long and soundly, for it was broad daylight when Van Helsing waked
me by coming into my room, he came over to my bedside and said, you need not trouble
about the knives, we shall not do it.
Why not, I asked, for his solemnity of the night before had greatly impressed me, because,
he said sternly, it is too late, or too early, see, here he held up the little golden crucifix,
this was stolen in the night.
How stolen, I asked in wonder, since you have it now, because I get it back from the worthless
wretch who stole it, from the woman who robbed the dead in the living, her punishment will
surely come but not through me, she knew not altogether what she did, and thus unknowing
she only stole, now we must wait.
He went away on the word, leaving me with a new mystery to think of, a new puzzle to
grapple with, the forenoon was a dreary time, but at noon the solicitor came, Mr. Markand,
of Holman's sons Markand and Litterdale.
He was very genial and very appreciative of what we had done, and took off our hands all
cares as to details, during lunch he told us that Mrs. Westenra had for some time expected
sudden death from her heart, and had put her affairs in absolute order, he informed us
that with the exception of a certain entailed property of Lucy's father, which now in default
of direct issue went back to a distant branch of the family, the whole estate, real and
personal, was left absolutely to Arthur Homewood, when he had told us so much he went on, frankly
we did our best to prevent such a testamentary disposition, and pointed out certain contingencies
that might leave her daughter, either penniless or not so free as she should be to act regarding
a matrimonial alliance, indeed we pressed the matter so far that we almost came into
collision, for she asked us if we were or were not prepared to carry out her wishes,
of course we had then no alternative but to accept, we were right in principle, and ninety
nine times out of a hundred we should have proved, by the logic of events, the accuracy
of our judgment, frankly however, I must admit that in this case any other form of
dispossession would have rendered impossible the carrying out of her wishes, for by her
predeceasing her daughter, the latter would have come into possession of the property,
and even if she had only survived her mother by five minutes, her property would, in case
there were no will, and a will was a practical impossibility in this case, have been treated
at her decease as underintessency, in which case Lord Galdeming, though so dear a friend,
would have had no claim in the world, and the inheritors being remote would not be likely
to abandon their just rights, for sentimental reasons regarding an entire stranger, I assure
you my dear sirs, I am rejoiced at the result, perfectly rejoiced.
He was a good fellow, but his rejoicing at the one little part, in which he was so officially
interested, of so great a tragedy, was an object lesson in the limitations of sympathetic
understanding. He did not remain long, but said he would look in later in the day and
see Lord Galdeming. His coming, however, had been a certain comfort to us, since it assured
us that we should not have to dread hostile criticism as to any of our acts. Arthur was
expected to arrive at five o'clock, so a little before that time we visited the great chamber.
It was so in very truth, for now both mother and daughter lay in it. The undertaker, true
to his craft, had made the best display he could of his goods, and there was a mortuary
air about the place that lowered our spirits at once.
Van Helsing ordered the former arrangement to be adhered to, explaining that, as Lord
Galdeming was coming very soon, it would be less harrowing to his feelings to see all
that was left of his fiancée quite alone. The undertaker seemed shocked at his own stupidity,
and exerted himself to restore things to the condition in which we left them the night
before, so that, when Arthur came, such shocks to his feelings that we could avoid were saved.
Poor fellow! He looked desperately sad and broken. Even his stalwart manhood seemed to
have shrunk somewhat under the strain of his much-tried emotions. He had, I knew, been
very genuinely and devotedly attached to his father, and to lose him, and at such a
time, was a bitter blow to him. With me he was as warm as ever, and to Van Helsing he
was sweetly courteous, but I could not help seeing that there was some constraint with
him. The professor noticed it too, and mentioned me to bring him upstairs. I did so, and left
him at the door of the room, so I felt he would like to be quite alone with her, but
he took my arm, and led me in, saying huskily,
You loved her too, old fellow. She told me all about it, and there was no friend had
a closer place in her heart than you. I don't know how to thank you for all you had done
for her. I can't think yet.
Here, he suddenly broke down, and threw his arms round my shoulders, and laid his head
on my breast, crying, Oh, Jack, Jack, what shall I do? The whole of life seems gone
from me all at once, and there is nothing in the wide world for me to live for.
I comforted him as well as I could. In such cases men do not need much expression. A grip
of the hand, the tightening of an arm over the shoulder, the sob in unison, are expressions
of sympathy dear to a man's heart. I stood still and silent till his sobs died away,
and then I said softly to him, Come and look at her.
Together we moved over to the bed, and I lifted the lawn from her face. God, how beautiful
she was! Every hour seemed to be enhancing her loveliness. It frightened and amazed me
somewhat, and as for Arthur, he felt a trembling, and finally was shaken with doubt as with
an egu. At last, after a long pause, he said to me in a faint whisper, Jack, is she really
dead?
I assured him sadly that it was so, and went on to suggest, for I felt that such a horrible
doubt should not have life for a moment longer than I could help, that it often happened
that after death faces become softened and even resolved into their youthful beauty,
that this was especially so when death had been preceded by any acute or prolonged suffering.
I seemed to quite do away with any doubt, and after kneeling beside the couch for a
while, and looking at her lovingly and long, he turned aside. I told him that this must
be good-bye, as the coffin had to be prepared, so he went back and took her dead hand and
his and kissed it, and bent over and kissed her forehead. He came away, fondly looking
back over his shoulder at her as he came. I left him in the drawing room, and told Van
Helsing that he had said good-bye, so the later went to the kitchen to tell the undertaker's
men to proceed with the preparations and to screw up the coffin. When he came out of the
room again, I told him of Arthur's question, and he replied, I am not surprised. Just now
I doubted for a moment myself. We all dined together, and I could see that poor Art was
trying to make the best of things. Van Helsing had been silent all dinner time, but when
we had lit our cigars, he said, Lord. But Arthur interrupted him. No, no, not that for
God's sake, not yet at any rate. Forgive me, sir. I did not mean to speak offensively.
It is only because my loss is so recent. The professor answered very sweetly, I said, I
only use that name because I was in doubt. I must not call you Mr., and I have grown
to love you. Yes, my dear boy, to love you as Arthur.
Arthur held out his hand and took the old man's warmly.
Call me what you will, he said. I hope I may always have the title of a friend, and let
me say that I am at a loss for words to thank you for your goodness to my poor dear. He
paused a moment and went on. I know that she understood your goodness even better than
I do, and if I was rude, or in any way wanting at the time you acted so, you remember.
The professor nodded. You must forgive me. He answered with a grave kindness. I know
it was hard for you to quite trust me then, for to trust such violence needs to understand,
and I take it that you do not, that you cannot trust me now, for you do not yet understand,
and there may be more times when I shall want you to trust when you cannot, and may not,
and must not yet understand, but the time will come when your trust shall be whole and
complete in me, and when you shall understand as though the sunlight himself shone through.
Then you shall bless me from the first to last for your own sake, and for the sake of
others, and for her dear sake to whom I swore to protect.
And indeed, indeed, sir, said Arthur warmly, I shall in all ways trust you. I know and
believe you have a very noble heart, and you are Jack's friend, and you were hers. You
shall do what you like.
The professor cleared his throat a couple of times, as though about to speak, and finally
said, May I ask you something now?
Certainly.
You know that Mrs. Westenra left you all her property.
No, poor dear, I never thought of it.
And as it is all yours, you have a right to deal with it as you will. I want you to give
me the permission to read all Mrs. Lucy's papers and letters. Believe me, it is no idle
curiosity. I have a motive of which, be sure, she would have approved. I have them all here.
I took them before we knew that all was yours, so that no strange hand might touch them,
no strange eye look through words into her soul. I shall keep them, if I may. Even you
may not see them yet, but I shall keep you safe. No word shall be lost, and in good time
I shall give them back to you. It is not a hard thing that I ask, but you will do it,
will you not, for Lucy's sake?
Arthur spoke out heartily, like his old self.
Dr. Van Helsing, you may do what you will. I feel that in saying this I am doing what
my dear one would have approved. I shall not trouble you with questions till the time comes.
The old professor stood up as he said solemnly, and you are right. There will be pain for
us all, but it will not be all pain, nor will this pain be the last. We, and you too,
you most of all, dear boy, will have to pass through the bitter water before we reach the
suite. But we must be brave of heart and unselfish, and do our duty, and all will be well.
I slept on a sofa in Arthur's room that night. Van Helsing did not go to bed at all. He went
to and fro as if patrolling the house, and was never out of sight of the room where Lucy
lay in her coffin, strewn with the wild garlic flowers, which sent through the order of lily
and rose a heavy overpowering smell into the night.
Nina Harker's Journal, 22 September. In the tray into Exeter, Jonathan, sleeping,
it seems only yesterday that the last entry was made, and yet how much between then. In
Whitby and all the world before me, Jonathan away, and no news of him, and now married
to Jonathan, Jonathan a solicitor, a partner, rich, master of his business, Mr. Hawkins,
dead and buried, and Jonathan with another attack that may harm him. Someday he may ask
me about it. Down it all goes. I am rusty in my short hand. See what unexpected prosperity
does for us. So it may be as well to freshen it up again, with an exercise, anyhow.
This service was very simple, and very solemn. There were only ourselves and the servants
there, one or two old friends of his from Exeter, his London agent, and a gentleman
representing Sir John Paxton, the president of the Incorporated Law Society. Jonathan
and I stood hand in hand, and we felt that our best and dearest friend was gone from
us. We came back to town quietly, taking a bus to Hyde Park Corner. Jonathan thought
it would interest me to go into the row for a while, so we sat down. But there were very
few people there, and it was sad looking and desolate to see so many empty chairs. It made
us think of the empty chair at home. So we got up and walked down Piccadilly. Jonathan
was holding me by the arm, the way he used to, in the old days, before I went to school.
I felt it very improper, for you can go on for some years teaching etiquette and decorum
to other girls, without the pedantry of it biting into yourself a bit. But it was Jonathan,
and he was my husband, and we didn't know anybody who saw us, and we didn't care if
they did. So on we walked. I was looking at a very beautiful girl, in a big cartwheel
hat, sitting in a Victoria, outside Galenios, and I felt Jonathan clutch my arm so tight
that he hurt me, and he said, under his breath, my God, I am all alone, and I don't know
always anxious about Jonathan, for I fear that some nervous fit may upset him again.
So I turned to him quickly and asked him what it was that disturbed him. He was very pale,
and his eyes seemed bulging out as, half in terror and half in amazement, he gazed at
a tall, thin man, with a beaky nose and black mustache and pointing beard, who was also
observing the pretty girl. He was looking at her so hard that he did not see either
of us, and so I had a good view of him. His face was not a good face. It was hard and
cruel and sensual, and big white teeth that looked all the whiter because his lips were
so red, were pointed like an animal's. Jonathan kept staring at him, till I was afraid he
would notice. I feared he might take it ill. He looked so fierce and nasty. I asked Jonathan
why he was disturbed, and he answered, evidently thinking I knew as much about it as he did.
Do you see who it is? No, dear, I said. I don't know him. Who is it? His answer seemed
a shock and thrill me, for it was said as if he did not know that it was me, Mina, to
whom we were speaking. It is the man himself. The poor dear was evidently terrified at something,
very greatly terrified. I do believe that if he had not had me to lean on and to support
him he would have sunk down. He kept staring. A man came out of the shop with a small parcel
and gave it to the lady, who then drove off. The dark man kept his eyes fixed on her, and
when the carriage moved up Piccadilly he followed in the same direction and hailed a handsome.
Jonathan kept looking after him and said, as if to himself, I believe it is the Count,
but he has grown young. My God, if this be so! Oh, my God, my God! If only I knew! If
only I knew! He was distressing himself so much that I feared to keep his mind on the
subject by asking him any questions, so I remained silent. I drew away quietly, and
he, holding my arm, came easily. We walked a little further, and then went in and sat
for a while in the green park. It was a hot day for autumn, and there was a comfortable
seat in a shady place. After a few minutes staring at nothing, Jonathan's eyes closed,
and he went quickly into his sleep with his head on my shoulder. I thought it was the
best thing for him, so did not disturb him. In about twenty minutes he woke up and said
to me quite cheerfully, Why, Mina, have I been asleep? Oh, do forgive me for being so
rude. Come, and we'll have a cup of tea somewhere. He had evidently forgotten all about the dark
stranger, as in his illness he had forgotten all that this episode had reminded him of.
I don't like this lapsing into forgetfulness. It may make or continue some injury to the
brain. I must not ask him, for fear I shall do more harm than good, but I must somehow
learn the facts of his journey abroad. The time has come, I fear, when I must open the
parcel and know what is written. Oh, Jonathan, you will, I know, forgive me if I do wrong,
but it is for your own dear sake.
Later, a sad homecoming in every way, the house empty of the dear soul who was so good
to us, Jonathan still pale and dizzy under a slight relapse of his malady, and now a telegram
from Van Helsing, whoever he may be.
You will be grieved to hear that Mrs. Westenra died five days ago, and that Lucy died the
day before yesterday. They were both buried today.
Oh, what a wealth of sorrow in a few words! Poor Mrs. Westenra! Poor Lucy! Gone! Gone!
Never to return to us! And poor, poor Arthur, to have lost such a sweetness out of his life!
God help us all to bear our troubles!
Dr. Seward's Diary, continued.
22 September. It is all over. Arthur has gone back to Ring, and has taken Quincy Morris
with him. What a fine fellow is Quincy! I believe in my heart of hearts that he suffered
as much about Lucy's death as any of us, but he bore himself through it like a moral liking.
If America can go on breeding men like that, she will be a power in the world indeed.
Van Helsing is lying down, having a rest preparatory to his journey. He goes to Amsterdam tonight,
but says he will return tomorrow night, that he only wants to make some arrangements, which
can only be made personally. He is to stop with me then, if he can. He says he has work
to do in London which may take him some time. Poor old fellow! I fear that the strain of
the past week has broken down even his iron strength. All the time of the burial he was,
I could see, putting some terrible restraint on himself. When it was all over, we were
standing besides Arthur, who, poor fellow, was speaking of his part in the operation
where his blood had been transfused to his Lucy's veins. I could see Van Helsing's face
grow white and purple by turns. Arthur was saying he felt since then as if they too had
been really married, and that she was his wife in the sight of God. None of us said
a word of the other two operations, and none of us ever shall. Arthur and Quincy went away
together to the station, and Van Helsing and I came on here. The moment we were alone in
the carriage, he gave way to a regular fit of hysterics. He has denied to me since that
it was hysterics, and insisted that it was only a sense of humour asserting itself under
very terrible conditions. He laughed till he cried, and I had to draw down the blinds,
lest anyone should see us and misjudge. And then he cried till he laughed again, and laughed
and cried together, just as a woman does. I tried to be stern with him, as one is to
a woman under the circumstances, but it had no effect. Men and women are so different
in manifestations of nervous strength or weakness. Then when his face grew grave and
stern again, I asked him why his mirth, and why at such a time. His reply was in a way
characteristic of him, for it was logical and forceful and mysterious. He said, Ah,
you don't comprehend, friend John. Do not think that I am not sad, though I laugh. See,
I have cried even when the laugh did choke me. But no more think that I am sorry when
I cry, for the laugh he come just the same. Keep it always with you, that laughter who
knock at your door and say, May I come in? It is not true laughter. No, he is a king,
and he come when and how he like. He ask no person, he choose no time of suitability.
He say I am here. Behold an example I grieve my heart out, for that so young sweet girl.
I give my blood for her, though I am old and worn. I give my time, my skill, my sleep.
I let my other sufferers want that she may have it all. And yet I can laugh at her very
grave, laugh when the clay from the spade of the sexton drop upon her coffin and say,
Thud, thud, to my heart, till it send back the blood from my cheek. My heart bleed for
that poor boy, that dear boy, so of an age of mine own boy had I been so blessed that
he live, and with his hair and eyes the same. There, you know now why I love you, friend.
I love him so. And yet when he say things that touch my husband heart to the quick,
and make my father heart yearn to him as to no other man, not even you, friend John, for
we are more level in experiences than father and son. Yet even at such a moment, king laugh,
he come to me and shout and bellow in my ear, Here I am, here I am, till the blood come
dance back and bring some of the sunshine that he carry with him to my cheek. Oh friend
John, it is a strange world, a sad world, a world full of miseries and woes and troubles.
And yet when king laugh come, he make them all dance to the tune he play. Bleeding hearts
and dry bones of the churchyard and tears that burn as they fall, all dance together
to the music that he make with his smileless mouth of him. And believe me friend John,
that he is good to come and kind. Ah, we men and women are like ropes drawn tight with
strain that pull us different ways. Then tears come and like the rain on the ropes they brace
us up, until perhaps the strain become too great and we break. But king laugh he come
like the sunshine and he ease off the strain again and we bear to go on with our labor,
what it may be. I did not like to wound him by pretending not to see his idea. But as
I did not yet understand the cause of his laughter, I asked him. As he answered me his
face grew stern and he said in quite a different tone, Oh, it was the grim irony of it all,
this so lovely lady, garlanded with flowers that looked so fair as life, till one by one
we wondered if she were truly dead. She laid in that so fine marble house, in that lonely
churchyard where rests so many of her kin, lay there with the mother who loved her and
whom she loved, and that sacred bell going toll, toll, toll, so sad and slow, and those
holy men with the white garments of the angel, pretending to read books, and yet all the
time their eyes never on the page, and all of us with the bowed head, and for what? She
is dead, so is it not? Well, for the life of me, professor, I said, I can't see anything
to laugh at and all that. Why, your expression makes it a harder puzzle than before. But
even if the burial service was comic, what about poor art and his trouble? Why, his heart
was simply breaking. Just so, said he not that the transfusion of his blood to her veins
had made her truly his bride. Yes, and it was a sweet and comforting idea for him. Quite
so. But there was a difficulty, friend John. If so that, then what about the others? Ho,
ho. Then this so sweet maid is a polyandrist, and me, with my poor wife dead to me, but
alive by church's law, though no wits, all gone, even I, who am faithful husband to his
now no wife, am bigamist. I don't see where the joke comes in there either, I said, and
I did not feel particularly pleased with him for saying such things. He laid his hand on
my arm and said, Friend John, forgive me if I pain. I showed not my feelings to others
when it would wound, but only to you, my old friend, whom I can trust. If you could have
looked into my heart, then when I want to laugh, if you could have done so when the
laughed arrived, if you could do so now, when King Laugh have packed up his crown and all
that is to him, for he go far, far from me, and for a long, long time, maybe you would,
perhaps, pity me the most of all. I was touched by the tenderness of his tone and asked why.
Because I know. And now we are all scattered, and for many a long day loneliness will sit
over our roofs with brooding wings. Lucy lies in the tomb of her kin, a lordly death house
in a lonely churchyard, away from teeming London, where the air is fresh and the sun
rises over Hampstead Hill, and where wildflowers grow of their own accord. So I can finish
this diary, and God only knows if I shall ever begin another. If I do, or if I even
open this again, it will be to deal with different people and different themes, for here at the
end, where the romance of my life is told, ere I go back to take up the thread of my
life work, I say sadly and without hope, fini.
The Westminster Gazette. 25 September. A Hampstead Mystery. The neighborhood of Hampstead is
just at present, exercised with a series of events which seem to run on lines parallel
to those of what was known to the writers of headlines as The Kensington Horror, or
The Stabbing Woman, or The Woman in Black. During the past two or three days, several
cases have occurred of young children straying from home or neglecting to return from their
playing on the heath. In all these cases the children were too young to give any properly
intelligible account of themselves, but the consensus of their excuses is that they had
been with a blooper lady. It has always been late in the evening when they have been missed,
and on two occasions the children had not been found until early in the following morning.
It is generally supposed in the neighborhood that, as the first child missed gave his reason
for being away that a blooper lady had asked him to come for a walk, the others had picked
up the phrase and used it as occasion served. This is the more natural as the favorite game
of the little ones at present is luring each other away by wiles. A correspondent writes
us that to see some of the tiny tots pretending to be the blooper lady is supremely funny.
Some of our characteristics might, he says, take a lesson in the irony of grotesque by
comparing the reality in the picture. It is only in accordance with general principles
of human nature that the blooper lady should be the popular role at these alfresco performances.
Our correspondent naively says that even Ellen Terry could not be so winningly attractive as
some of these grubby-faced little children pretend and even imagine themselves to be.
There is, however, possibly a serious side to the question, for some of the children,
indeed all who have been missed at night, have been slightly torn or wounded in the
throat. The wounds seem such as might be made by a rat or a small dog, and although of not
much importance individually, would tend to show that whatever animal inflicts them has
a system or method of its own. The police of the division have been instructed to keep
a sharp lookout for straying children, especially when very young, in and around Hampstead Heath,
and for any stray dog which may be about.
The Westminster Gazette, 25 September. Extra Special. The Hampstead Horror. Another child
injured. The blooper lady. We have just received intelligence that another child missed last
night was only discovered late in the morning under a firs bush at the Shooter's Hill side
of Hampstead Heath, which is perhaps less frequented than the other parts. It has the
same tiny wound in the throat as has been noticed in other cases. It was terribly weak
and looked quite emaciated, yet too impartially restored had the common story to tell of being
lured away by the blooper lady.
Recorded by Marlo Diane. April 21-26, 2006. Piscid West, Prince Edward Island.
23 September. Jonathan is better after a bad night. I am so glad that he has plenty of work to do,
for that keeps his mind off the terrible things, and oh, I am rejoiced that he is not now weighed
down with the responsibility of his new position. I knew he would be true to himself, and now,
how proud I am to see my Jonathan rising to the height of his advancement, and keeping pace in
ways with the duties that come upon him. He will be away all day till late, for he said he could
not lunch at home. My household work is done, so I shall take his foreign journal and lock myself
up in my room and read it. 24 September. I hadn't the heart to write last night that
terrible record of Jonathan's upset me so. Poor dear, how he must have suffered, whether it be
true or only imagination. I wonder if there is any truth in it at all. Did he get his brain fever
and then write all those terrible things, or had he some cause for it all? I suppose I shall never
know, for I dare not open the subject to him. And yet, that man we saw yesterday,
he seemed quite certain of him. Poor fellow. I suppose it was a funeral upset him and sent
his mind back on some train of thought. He believes it all himself. I remember how on our
wedding day he said, unless some solemn duty come upon me to go back to the bitter hours,
asleep or awake, mad or sane. There seems to be through it all some thread of continuity.
That fearful count was coming to London. If it should be, and he came to London with its
teeming millions, there may be a solemn duty, and if it come, we must not shrink from it.
I shall be prepared. I shall get my typewriter this very hour and begin transcribing. Then we
shall be ready for other eyes, if required. And if it be wanted then, perhaps, if I am ready,
poor Jonathan may not be upset, for I can speak for him and never let him be troubled or worried
with it at all. If ever Jonathan quite gets over the nervousness he may want to tell me of it all,
and I can ask him questions and find out things, and see how I may comfort him.
Letter, Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker. 24 September. Confidence.
Dear Madam, I pray you to pardon my writing, in that I am so far friend as that I sent you
sad news of Miss Lucy Westenra's death. By the kindness of Lord Godalming, I am empowered to
read her letters and papers, for I am deeply concerned about certain matters vitally important.
In them I find some letters from you, which show how great friends you were and how you love her.
Oh, Madam Mina, by that love, I implore you, help me. It is for others good that I ask
to redress great wrong and to lift much trouble and terrible troubles that may be more great than
you can know. May it be that I see you? You can trust me. I am friend of Dr. John Seward
and of Lord Godalming, that was Arthur of Miss Lucy. I must keep it private for the present from
all. I should come to Exeter to see you at once if you tell me I am privileged to come,
and where and when. I implore your pardon, Madam. I have read your letters to poor Lucy
and know how good you are and how your husband suffer. So I pray you, if it may be,
enlighten him not, lest it may harm. Again your pardon and forgive me. Van Helsing.
Telegram Mrs. Harker to Van Helsing. 25 September. Come today by quarter past 10 train,
if you can catch it. Can see you any time you call. Wilhelmina Harker. Mina Harker's Journal.
25 September. I cannot help feeling terribly excited as the time draws near for the visit
of Dr. Van Helsing, for somehow I expect that it will throw some light upon Jonathan's sad experience
and as he attended poor dear Lucy in her last illness he can tell me all about her.
That is the reason of his coming. It is concerning Lucy and her sleepwalking
and not about Jonathan. Then I shall never know the real truth now. How silly I am.
That awful journal gets hold of my imagination and tinges everything with something of its own
colour. Of course it is about Lucy. That habit came back to the poor dear and that awful night
on the cliff must have made her ill. I had almost forgotten in my own affairs how ill she was
afterwards. She must have told him of her sleepwalking adventure on the cliff and that
I knew all about it and now he wants me to tell him what I know so that he may understand.
I hope I did right in not saying anything of it to Mrs. Westenra.
I should never forgive myself if any act of mine were it even a negative one
brought harm on poor dear Lucy. I hope too Dr. Van Helsing will not blame me.
I have had so much trouble and anxiety of late that I feel I cannot bear more just at present.
I suppose a cry does us all good at times. It clears the air as other rain does.
Perhaps it was reading the journal yesterday that upset me and then Jonathan went away this
morning to stay away from me a whole day and night, the first time we have been parted since
our marriage. I do hope the dear fellow will take care of himself and that nothing will occur to
him. It is two o'clock and the doctor will be here soon now. I shall say nothing of
Jonathan's journal unless he asks me. I am so glad I have typewritten out my own journal
so that in case he asks about Lucy I can hand it to him. It will save much questioning.
Later he has come and gone. Oh what a strange meeting and how it all makes my head whirl round.
I feel like one in a dream. Can it be all possible or even a part of it? If I had not read
Jonathan's journal first I should never have accepted even a possibility. Poor poor dear
Jonathan. How he must have suffered. Please the good God all this may not upset him again.
I shall try to save him from it but it may be even a consolation and a help to him terrible
though it be and awful in its consequences to know for certain that his eyes and ears and brain did
not deceive him and that it is all true. It may be that it is the doubt which haunts him
and that when the doubt is removed no matter which waking or dreaming may prove the truth
he will be more satisfied and better able to bear the shock.
Dr. Van Helsing must be a good man as well as a clever one if he is Arthur's friend and Dr.
Seward's and if they brought him all the way from Holland to look after Lucy. I feel from having
seen him that he is good and kind and of a noble nature. When he comes tomorrow I shall ask him
Jonathan and then please God all this sorrow and anxiety may lead to a good end.
I used to think I would like to practice interviewing. Jonathan's friend on the
Exeter News told him that memory is everything in such work that you must be able to put down
exactly almost every word spoken even if you had to refine some of it afterwards.
Here was a rare interview. I shall try to record it verbatim.
It was half past two o'clock when the knock came. I took my courage and waited. In a few minutes
Mary opened the door and announced Dr. Van Helsing. I rose and bowed and he came towards me, a man of
medium weight, strongly built, with his shoulders set back over a broad deep chest and a neck well
advanced on the trunk as the head is on the neck. The poise of the head strikes me at once as
indicative of thought and power. The head is noble, well-sized, broad and large behind the ears.
The face clean-shaven shows a hard square chin, a large resolute mobile mouth, a good-sized nose
rather straight but with quick sensitive nostrils that seem to broaden as the big bushy brows come
down and the mouth tightens. The forehead is broad and fine, rising at first almost straight
and then sloping back over two bumps or ridges wide apart, such a forehead that the reddish hair
cannot possibly tumble over it but falls naturally back and to the sides. Big dark blue eyes were set
widely apart and are quick and tender or stern with the man's moods. He said to me, Mrs. Harker is it
not? I bowed ascent. That was Miss Mina Murray? Again I assented. It is Mina Murray that I came
to see that was friend of that poor dear child Lucy Westenra. Madam Mina, it is on account of
the dead that I come. Sir, I said, you could have no better claim on me than that you were a friend
and helper of Lucy Westenra and I held out my hand. He took it and said tenderly,
oh Madam Mina, I knew that the friend of that poor little girl must be good but I had yet to learn.
He finished his speech with a courtly bow. I asked him what it was that he wanted to see me about
so he at once began, I have read your letters to Miss Lucy, forgive me but I had to begin to inquire
somewhere and there was none to ask. I know that you were with her at Whitby. She sometimes kept a
diary, you need not look surprised Madam Mina. It was begun after you had left and was an imitation
of you and in that diary she traces by inference certain things to a sleepwalking in which she
puts down that you saved her. In great perplexity then I come to you and ask you out of your so much
kindness to tell me all of it that you can remember. I can tell you, I think, Dr. Van Helsing, all about
it. Ah, then you have good memory for facts, for details. It is not always so with young ladies.
No, doctor, but I wrote it all down at the time. I can show it to you if you like. Oh Madam Mina,
I will be grateful. You will do me much favor. I could not resist the temptation of mystifying him
a bit. I suppose it is some taste of the original apple that remains still in our mouths. So I handed
him the shorthand diary. He took it with a grateful bow and said, may I read it? If you wish. I answered
as demurely as I could. He opened it and for an instant his face fell. Then he stood up and bowed.
Oh, you so clever woman, he said. I knew long that Mr. Jonathan was a man of much thankfulness,
but see, his wife have all the good things. And will you not so much honor me, and so help me,
as to read it for me, alas, I know not the shorthand. By this time my little joke was over
and I was almost ashamed, so I took the typewritten copy from my work basket and handed it to him.
Forgive me, I said. I could not help it, but I had been thinking that it was of dear Lucy that you
wished to ask, and so that you might not have time to wait. Not on my account, but because I know your
time must be precious. I have written it out on the typewriter for you. He took it and his eyes
glistened. You are so good, he said. And may I read it now? I may want to ask you some things when
I have read. By all means, I said. Read it over whilst I order lunch, and then you can ask me
questions whilst we eat. He bowed, and settled himself in a chair with his back to the light,
and became so absorbed in the papers whilst I went to see after lunch chiefly in order that he might
not be disturbed. When I came back I found him walking hurriedly up and down the room, his face
all ablaze with excitement. He rushed up to me and took me by both hands. Oh, Madam Mina, he said.
How can I say what I owe you? This paper is as sunshine. It opens the gate to me. I am dazed,
I am dazzled with so much light, and yet clouds roll in behind the light every time. But that you
do not, cannot comprehend. Oh, but I am grateful to you, you so clever woman. Madam, he said this
very solemnly. If ever Abraham Van Helsing can do anything for you or yours, I trust you will let me
know. It will be pleasure and delight if I may serve you as a friend, as a friend. But all I have
ever learned, all I can ever do, shall be for you and those you love. There are darknesses in life,
and there are lights. You are one of the lights. You will have a happy life and a good life,
and your husband will be blessed in you. But Doctor, you praise me too much. You do not know me,
not know you, I who am old and who have studied all my life men and women. I who have made my
specialty the brain and all that belongs to him and all that follow from him. And I have read your
diary that you have so goodly written for me and which breathes out truth in every line.
I who have read your so sweet letter to poor Lucy of your marriage and your trust, not know you.
Oh, Madam Mina, good women tell all their lives, and by day and by hour and by minute,
such things that angels can read. And we men who wish to know have in us something of angel's eyes.
Your husband is noble nature, and you are noble too, for you trust. And trust cannot be where
there is mean nature. And your husband? Tell me of him. Is he quite well? Is all that fever gone,
and is he strong and hearty? I saw here an opening to ask him about Jonathan, so I said,
He was almost recovered, but he has been greatly upset by Mr. Hawkins' death. He interrupted,
Oh, yes, I know, I know. I have read your last two letters. I went on, I suppose this upset him,
for when we were in town on Thursday last, he had a sort of shock. A shock? And after brain fever
so soon, that is not good. What kind of shock was it? He thought he saw someone who recalled
something terrible, something which led to his brain fever. And here the whole thing seemed to
overwhelm me in a rush, the pity for Jonathan, the horror which he experienced, the whole fearful
mystery of his diary, and the fear that has been brooding over me ever since all came in a tumult.
I suppose I was hysterical, for I threw myself on my knees and held up my hands to him and implored
him to make my husband well again. He took my hands and raised me up and made me sit on the sofa
and sat by me. He held my hand in his and said to me with, Oh, such infinite sweetness.
My life is a barren and lonely one, so full of work that I have not had much time for friendships.
But since I have been summoned to here by my friend John Seward, I have known so many good people
and seen such nobility that I feel more than ever. And it has grown with my advancing years
the loneliness of my life. Believe me then that I come here full of respect for you
and you have given me hope. Hope not in what I am seeking of, but that there are good women
still left to make life happy. Good women whose lives and whose truths may make good lesson for
the children that are to be. I am glad, glad that I may be of some use to you. For if your husband
suffer, he suffer within the range of my study and experience. I promise you that I will gladly do
all for him that I can, all to make his life strong and manly and your life a happy one.
Now you must eat. You are overwrought and perhaps overanxious. Husband Jonathan would not like to
see you so pale and what he like not where he love is not to his good. Therefore for his sake
you must eat and smile. You have told me about Lucy and so now we shall not speak of it
lest it distress. I shall stay in Exeter tonight for I want to think much over what you have told me
and when I have thought I will ask you questions if I may. And then too you will tell me of husband
Jonathan's trouble so far as you can but not yet. You must eat now. Afterwards you shall tell me
all. After lunch when we went back to the drawing room he said to me, at now tell me all about him.
When it came to speaking to this great learned man I began to fear that he would think me a weak
fool and Jonathan a madman. That journal is all so strange and I hesitated to go on but he was so
sweet and kind and he had promised to help and I trusted him. So I said, Dr Van Helsing what I have
to tell you is so queer that you must not laugh at me or at my husband. I have been since yesterday
in a sort of fever of doubt. You must be kind to me and not think me foolish that I have even half
believed some very strange things. He reassured me by his manner as well as his words when he said,
oh my dear if you only know how strange is the matter regarding which I am here it is you who
would laugh. I have learned not to think little of anyone's belief no matter how strange it may be.
I have tried to keep an open mind and it is not the ordinary things of life that could close it
but the strange things the extraordinary things the things that make one doubt if they be mad or
sane. Thank you thank you a thousand times you have taken a weight off my mind. If you will let me
I shall give you a paper to read. It is long but I have typewritten it out. It will tell you my
and Jonathan's. It is the copy of his journal when abroad and all that happened. I dare not
say anything of it. You will read it for yourself and judge and then when I see you perhaps you will
be very kind and tell me what you think. I promise he said as I gave him the papers I shall in the
morning as soon as I can come to see you and your husband if I may. Jonathan will be here at half
past eleven and you must come to lunch with us and see him then. You could catch the quick
three thirty four train which will leave you at Paddington before eight. He was surprised
at my knowledge of the trains off hand but he does not know that I have made up all the trains
to and from Exeter so that I may help Jonathan in case he is in a hurry. So he took the papers with
him and went away and I sit here thinking, thinking I don't know what.
Letter by hand, Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker. 25 September, six o'clock. Dear Madame Mina,
I have read your husband's so wonderful diary. You may sleep without doubt. Strange and terrible
as it is, it is true. I will pledge my life on it. It may be worse for others but for him and you
there is no dread. He is a noble fellow and let me tell you from experience of men that one who
would do as he did in going down that wall and to that room, I and going a second time,
is not one to be injured in permanence by a shock. His brain and his heart are all right. This I
swear before I have even seen him so be at rest. I shall have much to ask him of other things.
I am blessed that today I come to see you for I have learned all at once so much that again I
dazzled, dazzled more than ever and I must think. Yours the most faithful, Abraham Van Helsing.
Letter, Mrs. Harker to Van Helsing. 25 September, 6.30 p.m. My dear Dr. Van Helsing,
a thousand thanks for your kind letter which has taken a great weight off my mind.
And yet if it be true what terrible things there are in the world and what an awful thing if that
man, that monster be really in London, I fear to think. I have this moment whilst writing had a
letter from Jonathan saying that he leaves by the 6.25 tonight from Launston and will be here at
10.18 so that I shall have no fear tonight. Will you therefore instead of lunching with us
please come to breakfast at eight o'clock if this be not too early for you?
You can get away if you are in a hurry by the 10.30 train which will bring you to Paddington by 2.35.
Do not answer this as I shall take it that if I do not hear you will come to breakfast.
Believe me, your faithful and grateful friend, Mina Harker.
26 September.
Jonathan Harker's Journal. 26 September. I thought never to write in this diary again,
but the time has come. When I got home last night Mina had supper ready, and when we had supped she
told me of Van Helsing's visit and of her having given him the two diaries copied out, and of how
anxious she has been about me. She showed me in the doctor's letter that all I wrote down was true.
It seems to have made a new man of me. It was the doubt as to the reality of the whole thing
that knocked me over. I felt impotent and in the dark and distrustful. But now that I know,
I am not afraid, even of the count. He has succeeded after all then in his design in
getting to London, and it was he I saw. He has got younger, and how? Van Helsing is the man to
mask him and hunt him out if he is anything like what Mina says. We sat late and talked it over.
Mina is dressing, and I shall call at the hotel in a few minutes and bring him over.
He was, I think, surprised to see me when I came into the room where he was and introduced myself.
He took me by the shoulder and turned my face round to the light and said, after a sharp scrutiny,
but Madame Mina told me you were ill, that you had had a shock. It was so funny to hear my wife
called Madame Mina by this kindly strong-faced old man. I smiled and said, I was ill, I have had a
shock, but you have cured me already. And how? By your letter to Mina last night. I was in doubt,
and then everything took a hue of unreality, and I did not know what to trust, even the evidence of
my own senses. Not knowing what to trust, I did not know what to do, and so had only to keep on
working in what had hitherto been the groove of my life. The groove ceased to avail me, and I
mistrusted myself. Doctor, you do not know what it is to doubt everything, even yourself. No,
you do not. You could not with eyebrows like yours. He seemed pleased and laughed, as he said,
so you are a physiognomist. I learn more here with each hour. I am with so much pleasure
coming to you to breakfast, and, oh, sir, you will pardon praise from an old man,
but you are blessed in your wife. I would listen to him go on praising Mina for a day,
so I simply nodded and stood silent. She is one of God's women, fashioned by his own hand
to show us men and other women that there is a heaven where we can enter, and that its light
can be here on earth. So true, so sweet, so noble, so little an egoist, and that, let me tell you,
is much in this age so sceptical and selfish. And you, sir, I have read all the letters to poor
Miss Lucy, and some of them speak of you, so I know you since some days from the knowing of others,
but I have seen your true self since last night. You will give me your hand, will you not,
and let us be friends for all our lives. We shook hands, and he was so earnest and so kind
that it made me quite chokey. And now, he said, may I ask you for some more help? I have a great
task to do, and at the beginning it is to know. You can help me here. Can you tell me what went
before your going to Transylvania? Later on I may ask for more help, and of a different kind,
but at first this will do. Look here, sir, I said, does what you have to do concern the count?
It does, he said solemnly. Then I am with you heart and soul. As you go by the 10.30 train,
you will not have time to read them, but I shall get the bundle of papers. You can take them with
you and read them in the train. After breakfast I saw him to the station. When we were parting,
he said, perhaps you will come to town if I send for you, and take Madame Mina, too.
We shall both come, when you will, I said. I had got him the morning papers and the London papers
of the previous night, and while we were talking at the carriage window waiting for the train to
start, he was turning them over. His eyes suddenly seemed to catch something in one of them, the
Westminster Gazette, I knew by the colour, and he grew quite white. He read something intently,
groaning to himself, my God, my God, so soon, so soon. I do not think he remembered me at the
moment. Just then the whistle blew and the train moved off. This recalled him to himself,
and he leaned out of the window and waved his hand, calling out,
Love to Madame Mina, I shall write so soon as ever I can.
26 September.
Dr. Seward's Diary. 26 September.
Truly there is no such thing as finality. Not a week since I said fini, and yet here I am starting
fresh again, or rather going on with the record. Until this afternoon I had no cause to think of
what is done. Renfield had become, to all intents, as sane as he ever was. He was already well ahead
with his fly business, and he had just started in the spider line also, so he had not been of any
trouble to me. I had a letter from Arthur, written on Sunday, and from it I gather that he is bearing
up wonderfully well. Quincy Morris is with him, and that is of much help, for he himself is a
bubbling well of good spirits. Quincy wrote me a line too, and from him I hear that Arthur is
beginning to recover something of his old buoyancy. So as to them, all my mind is at rest. As for
myself, I was settling down to my work with the enthusiasm which I used to have for it,
so that I might fairly have said that the wound which poor Lucy left on me was becoming
cicatrized. Everything is, however, now reopened, and what is to be the end God only knows.
I have an idea that Van Helsing thinks he knows too, but he will only let out enough at a time
to whet curiosity. He went to Exeter yesterday and stayed there all night. Today he came back
and almost bounded into the room at about half past five o'clock, and thrust last night's
Minster Gazette into my hand.
What do you think of that? he asked as he stood back and folded his arms.
I looked over the paper, for I really did not know what he meant, but he took it from me and
pointed out a paragraph about children being decoyed away at Hampstead. It did not convey much to me
until I reached a passage where it described small puncture wounds on their throats.
An idea struck me, and I looked up.
Well, he said, it's like poor Lucy's.
And what do you make of it?
Simply that there is some cause in common. Whatever it was that injured her has injured them.
I did not quite understand his answer.
That is true indirectly, but not directly.
How do you mean, Professor? I asked.
I was a little inclined to take his seriousness lightly, for,
after all, four days of rest and freedom from burning, harrowing anxiety does help to restore
one's spirits. But when I saw his face, it sobered me. Never, even in the midst of our
despair about poor Lucy, had he looked more stern.
Tell me, I said.
I can hazard no opinion. I do not know what to think, and I have no data on which to
conjecture.
Do you mean to tell me, friend John, that you have no suspicion as to what poor Lucy died of,
not after all the hints given, not only by events, but by me,
of nervous prostration following a great loss or waste of blood?
And how was the blood lost or wasted?
I shook my head.
He stepped over and sat down beside me, and went on,
You are a clever man, friend John. You reason well, and your wit is bold,
but you are too prejudiced. You do not let your eyes see nor your ears hear,
and that which is outside your daily life is not of account to you.
Do you not think that there are things which you cannot understand, and yet which are,
that some people see things that others cannot?
But these are things old and new which must not be contemplated by men's eyes,
because they know, or think they know, some things which other men have told them.
It is the fault of our science that it wants to explain all, and if it explained not,
then it says there is nothing to explain.
But yet we see around us every day the growth of new beliefs which think themselves new,
and which are yet but the old which pretend to be young,
like the fine ladies at the opera.
I suppose now you do not believe in corporeal transference?
No.
Nor in materialization?
Nor in astral bodies?
No.
Nor in the reading of thought?
Nor in hypnotism?
Yes, I said. Charcot has proved that pretty well.
He smiled as he went on.
Then you are satisfied as to it?
Yes.
And of course then you understand how it act, and how can follow the mind of the great Charcot,
alas that he is no more, into the very soul of the patient that he influenced?
No.
Then, friend John, am I to take it that you simply accept fact,
that you are satisfied to let from premise to conclusion be a blank?
No.
Tell me, for I am a student of the brain, how you accept hypnotism and reject the thought reading.
Let me tell you, my friend, that there are things done today in electrical science
which would have been deemed unholy by the very man who discovered electricity,
and who would themselves not so long before been burned as wizards.
There are always mysteries in life.
Why was it that Methuselah lived nine hundred years old?
And old Parr, one hundred and sixty-nine.
And yet that poor Lucy, with four men's blood in her poor veins, could not live even one day.
For had she lived one more day, we could save her.
Do you know all the mystery of life and death?
Do you know the altogether of comparative anatomy,
and can say wherefore the qualities of brutes are in some men and not in others?
Can you tell me why?
When other spiders die small and soon,
that one great spider lived for centuries in the tower of the old Spanish church,
and grew and grew, till on descending he could drink the oil of all the church lamps?
Can you tell me why, in the Pompous, I, and elsewhere,
there are bats that come out at night and open the veins of cattle and horses,
and suck dry their veins?
How in some islands of the western seas,
there are bats which hang on the trees all day,
and those who have seen describe as like giant nuts or pods,
and that when the sailors sleep on the deck, because that it is hot,
flit down on them, and then, and then, in the morning,
are found dead men, white as even Miss Lucy was?
Good God, Professor, I said, starting up.
Do you mean to tell me that Lucy was bitten by such a bat,
and that such a thing is here, in London, in the nineteenth century?
He waved his hand for silence and went on.
Can you tell me why the tortoise lives more long than generations of men,
why the elephant goes on and on till he sees dynasties,
and why the parrot never die only of bite of cat or dog or other complaint?
Can you tell me why men believe in all ages and places
that there are men and women who cannot die?
We all know, because science has vouched for the fact,
that there have been toads shut up in rocks for thousands of years,
shut in one so small hole that only hold him since the youth of the world.
Can you tell me how the Indian fakir can make himself to die
and have been buried and his grave sealed and corn sowed on it,
and the corn reaped and be cut and sown and reaped and cut again,
and then men come and take away the unbroken seal,
and that there lie the Indian fakir, not dead,
but that rise up and walk amongst them as before?
Here I interrupted him. I was getting bewildered.
He so crowded on my mind his list of nature's eccentricities and
possible impossibilities that my imagination was getting fired.
I had a dim idea that he was teaching me some lesson,
as long ago he used to do in his study at Amsterdam.
But he used to tell me the thing so that I could have the object of thought in mind all the time,
but now I was without his help, yet I wanted to follow him, so I said,
Professor, let me be your pet student again.
Tell me the thesis so that I may apply your knowledge as you go on.
At present I am only going in my mind from point to point as a madman,
and not a sane one, follows an idea.
I feel like a novice lumbering through a bog in a mist,
jumping from one tussock to another in the mere blind effort to move on,
without knowing where I am going.
That is a good image, he said.
Well, I shall tell you. My thesis is this.
I want you to believe. To believe what?
To believe in things that you cannot.
Let me illustrate.
I heard once of an American who so defined faith,
that faculty which enables us to believe things which we know to be untrue.
For one, I follow that man.
He meant that we shall have an open mind,
and not let a little bit of truth check the rush of the big truth,
like a small rock does a railway truck.
We get the small truth first, good.
We keep him, and we value him.
But all the same, we must not let him think himself all the truth in the universe.
Then you want me not to let some previous conviction
inure the receptivity of my mind with regard to some strange matter.
Do I read your lesson all right?
Ah, you are my favourite pupil still.
It is worth to teach you.
Now that you are willing to understand, you have taken the first step to understand.
You think, then, that those so small holes in the children's throats
were made by the same that made the holes in Miss Lucy?
I suppose so.
He stood up and said solemnly,
Then you are wrong.
Oh, would it were so, but alas, no.
It is worse, far, far worse.
In God's name, Professor Helsing, what do you mean?
I cried.
He threw himself with a despairing gesture into a chair,
and placed his elbows on the table, covering his face with his hands as he spoke.
They were made by Miss Lucy.
15. Dr. Seward's Diary, Continued.
For a while sheer anger mastered me. It was as if he had, during her life, struck Lucy
on the face. I smote the table hard and rose up as I said to him,
"'Dr. Van Helsing, are you mad?' He raised his head and looked at me, and somehow the
tenderness of his face calmed me at once. "'Would I were,' he said. Madness were
easy to bear compared with truth like this. "'Oh, my friend, why, think you, did I go
so far around? Why take so long to tell so simple a thing? Was it because I hate you
and have hated you all my life? Was it because I wished to give you pain? Was it that I wanted,
now so late, revenge for that time when you saved my life, and from a fearful death? Ah,
no.' "'Forgive me,' I said. He went on, "'My friend, it was because I wished to be
gentle in the breaking to you, for I know you have loved that so sweet lady. But even
yet I do not expect you to believe. It is so hard to accept at once any abstract truth
that we may doubt such to be possible when we have always believed the know of it. It
is more hard still to accept so sad a concrete truth, and of such a one as Miss Lucy. Tonight
I go to prove it. Dare you come with me?' "'This staggered me. A man does not like
to prove such a truth,' Byron accepted from the category, Jealousy, and proved the very
truth he most abhorred. He saw my hesitation and spoke. The logic is simple. No madman's
logic this time, jumping from tussock to tussock in a misty bog. If it not be true, then proof
will be relief. At worst it will not harm. If it be true, ah, there is the dread. Yet
every dread should help my cause, for in it is some need of belief. Come, I tell you what
I propose. First that we go off now and see that child in the hospital. Doctor Vincent
of the North Hospital, where the papers say the child is, is a friend of mine, and I think
of yours since you were in class at Amsterdam. He will let two scientists see his case, if
he will not let two friends. We shall tell him nothing, but only that we wish to learn.
And then...' And then?' He took a key from his pocket and held it up. And then we spend
the night, you and I, in the churchyard where Lucy lies. This is the key that locked the
tomb. I had it from the coffin man to give to Arthur. My heart sank within me, for I
felt that there was some fearful ordeal before us. I could do nothing, however, so I plucked
up what heart I could and said that we had better hasten, as the afternoon was passing.
We found the child awake. It had had a sleep and taken some food, and altogether was going
on well. Doctor Vincent took the bandage from its throat and showed us the punctures. There
was no mistaking the similarity to those which had been on Lucy's throat. They were smaller
and the edges looked fresher, that was all. We asked Vincent to what he attributed them,
and he replied that it must have been a bite of some animal, perhaps a rat, but for his
own part he was inclined to think it was one of the bats which are so numerous on the northern
heights of London. Out of so many harmless ones, he said, there may be some wild specimen
from the south of a more malignant species. Some sailor may have brought one home, and
it managed to escape, or even from the zoological gardens a young one may have got loose, or
one be bred there from a vampire. These things do occur, you know. Only ten days ago a wolf
got out and was, I believe, traced up in this direction. For a week after the children
were playing nothing but Red Riding Hood on the heath, and in every alley in the place,
until this Blufa Lady scare came along. Since then it has been quite a gala time with them.
Even this poor little mite, when he woke up today, asked the nurse if he might go away.
When she asked him why he wanted to go, he said he wanted to play with the Blufa Lady.
"'I hope,' said Van Helsing, "'that when you are sending the child home you will caution
its parents to keep strict watch over it. These fancies to stray are most dangerous,
and if the child were to remain out another night it would probably be fatal. But in any
case I suppose you will not let it away for some days.' Certainly not, not for a week
at least, longer if the wound is not healed.
"'Our visit to the hospital took more time than we had reckoned on, and the sun had dipped
before we came out. When Van Helsing saw how dark it was he said, "'There is not hurry.
It is more late than I thought. Come, let us seek somewhere that we may eat, and then
we shall go on our way.'
We dined at Jack Straw's castle along with a little crowd of bicyclists and others who
were genially noisy. About ten o'clock we started from the inn. It was then very dark,
and the scattered lamps made the darkness greater when we were once outside their individual
radius. The Professor had evidently noted the road we were to go, for he went on unhesitatingly,
but as for me I was in quite a mix-up as to locality. As we went further we met fewer
and fewer people, till at last we were somewhat surprised when we met even the patrol of horse
police going their usual suburban round. At last we reached the wall of the churchyard
which we climbed over. With some little difficulty, for it was very dark and the whole place seemed
so strange to us, we found the Western Ratoum. The Professor took the key, opened the creaky
door, and standing back, politely but quite unconsciously, motioned me to precede him.
There was a delicious irony in the offer, in the courtliness of giving preference on
such a ghastly occasion. My companion followed me quickly, and cautiously drew the door too,
after carefully ascertaining that the lock was a falling and not a spring one, in the
latter case we should have been in a bad plight. Then he fumbled in his bag and took out a
match box and a piece of candle, proceeded to make a light. The tomb in the daytime,
and when wreathed with fresh flowers, had looked grim and gruesome enough, but now,
some days afterwards, when the flowers hung lank and dead, their whites turning to rust,
and their greens to browns, when the spider and the beetle had resumed their accustomed
dominance, when the thyme discoloured stone and dust encrusted mortar and rusty dank iron,
and tarnished brass and clouded silver plating, gave back the feeble glimmer of a candle.
The effect was more miserable and sordid than could have been imagined. It conveyed irresistibly
the idea that life, animal life, was not the only thing which could pass away.
Van Helsing went about his work systematically, holding his candle so that he could read the
coffin plates, and so holding it that the sperm dropped in white patches which congealed
as they touched the metal, he made assurance of Lucy's coffin. Another search in his bag,
and he took out a turn screw.
What are you going to do? I asked.
To open the coffin you shall yet be convinced.
Straightway he began taking out the screws, and finally lifted off the lid showing the
casing of lead beneath. The sight was almost too much for me. It seemed to be as much an
affront to the dead as it would have been to have stripped off her clothing in her sleep
whilst living. I actually took hold of his hand to stop him. He only said, You shall
see. And again fumbling in his bag took out a tiny fretsaw. Striking the turn screw through
the lead with a swift downward stab, which made me wince, he made a small hole, which
was, however, big enough to admit the point of the saw. I had expected a rush of gas from
the weak old corpse. We doctors, who have had to study our dangers, have to become accustomed
to such things, and I drew back towards the door. But the Professor never stopped for
a moment. He sawed down a couple of feet along one side of the lead coffin, and then across
and down the other side. Taking the edge of the loose flange, he bent it back towards
the foot of the coffin, and holding up the candle into the aperture, motioned me to look.
I drew near and looked. The coffin was empty. It was certainly a surprise to me and gave me a
considerable shock, but Van Helsing was unmoved. He was now more sure than ever off his ground,
and so emboldened to proceed in his work. Are you satisfied now, friend John? he asked. I felt all
the dogged argumentativeness of my nature awake within me as I answered him. I am satisfied
that Lucy's body is not in that coffin, but that only proves one thing. And what is that,
friend John? That it is not there. That is good logic, he said, so far as it goes. But
how can you account for it not being there? Perhaps a body snatcher, I suggested. Some
of the undertaker's people may have stolen it. I felt that I was speaking folly, and
yet it was the only real cause which I could suggest.
The Professor sighed. Ah, well, he said, we must have more proof. Come with me. He put
on the coffin lid again, gathered up all his things and placed them in the bag, blew out
the light, and placed the candle also in the bag. We opened the door and went out. Behind
us he closed the door and locked it. He handed me the key, saying, Will you keep it? You
had better be assured. I laughed. It was not a very cheerful laugh, I am bound to say,
as I motioned him to keep it. A key is nothing, I said. There are many duplicates, and anyhow
it is not difficult to pick a lock of this kind. He said nothing, but put the key in
his pocket. Then he told me to watch at one side of the churchyard, whilst he would watch
at the other. I took up my place behind a yew tree, and I saw his dark figure move until
the intervening headstones and trees hid it from my sight.
It was a lonely vigil. Just after I had taken my place I heard a distant clock strike twelve,
and in time came one and two. I was chilled and unnerved, and angry with the Professor
for taking me on such an errand, and with myself for coming. I was too cold and too
sleepy to be keenly observant, and not sleepy enough to betray my trust, so altogether I
had a dreary, miserable time. Suddenly, as I turned round, I thought I saw
something like a white streak moving between two dark yew trees at the side of the churchyard
farthest from the tomb. At the same time a dark mass moved from the Professor's side
of the ground, and hurriedly went towards it. Then I too moved, but I had to go round
headstones and railed off tombs, and I stumbled over graves. The sky was overcast, and somewhere
far off an early cock crew.
A little ways off, beyond a line of scattered juniper trees which marked the pathway to
the church, a white, dim figure flitted in the direction of the tomb. The tomb itself
was hidden by trees, and I could not see where the figure had disappeared. I heard
the rustle of actual movement where I had first seen the white figure, and coming over
found the Professor holding in his arms a tiny child. When he saw me he held it out
to me, and said, Are you satisfied now?
No, I said, in a way that I felt was aggressive. Do you not see the child? Yes, it is a child,
but who brought it here, and is it wounded?
We shall see, said the Professor, and with one impulse we took our way out of the churchyard,
he carrying the sleeping child. When we had got some little distance away we went into
a clump of trees, and struck a match, and looked at the child's throat. It was without
a scratch or scar of any kind.
Was I right? I asked triumphantly.
We were just in time, said the Professor, thankfully.
We had now to decide what we were to do with the child, and so consulted about it. If we
were to take it to a police station we should have to give some account of our movements
during the night. At least we should have to make some statement as to how we had come
to find the child. So finally we decided that we would take it to the Heath, and when
we heard a policeman coming would leave it where he could not fail to find it. We would
then seek our way home as quickly as we could.
All fell out well, yet the edge of Hampstead Heath we heard a policeman's heavy tramp,
and laying the child on the pathway we waited and watched until he saw it as he flashed
his lantern to and fro. We heard his exclamation of astonishment, and then we went away silently.
By good chance we got a cab near the Spaniards and drove to town.
I cannot sleep, so I make this entry, but I must try to get a few hours sleep, as Van
Helsing is to call for me at noon. He insists that I go with him on another expedition.
27th September.
It was two o'clock before we found a suitable opportunity for our attempt. The funeral held
at noon was all completed, and the last stragglers of the mourners had taken themselves lazily
away when, looking carefully from behind a clump of alder trees, we saw the sexton lock
the gate after him. We knew that we were safe till the morning, did we desire it, but the
professor told me that we should not want more than an hour at most. Again I felt that
horrid sense of the reality of things in which any effort of imagination seemed out of place,
and I realized distinctly the perils of the law which we were incurring in our unhallowed
work. Besides, I felt it was all so useless, outrageous as it was to open a leaden coffin
to see if a woman dead nearly a week were really dead. It now seemed the height of folly
to open the tomb again when we knew from the evidence of our own eyesight that the coffin
was empty. I shrugged my shoulders, however, and rested silent, for Van Helsing had a way
of going on his own road no matter who remonstrated. He took the key, opened the vault, and again
courteously motioned me to proceed. The place was not so gruesome as last night, but oh,
how unutterably mean looking when the sunshine streamed in. Van Helsing walked over to Lucy's
coffin and I followed. He bent over and again forced back the leaden flange, and a shock
of surprise and dismay shot through me. There lay Lucy, seemingly just as we had seen her
the night before her funeral. She was, if possible, more radiantly beautiful than ever,
and I could not believe that she was dead. The lips were red, nay redder than before,
and on the cheeks was a delicate bloom.
"'Is this a juggle?' I said to him.
"'Are you convinced now?' said the professor in response, and as he spoke he put over his
hand, and in a way that made me shudder, pulled back the dead lips and showed the white teeth.
"'See,' he went on, "'they are even sharper than before.' With this and this,' and he
touched one of the canine teeth and that below it, the little children can be bitten. Are
you of belief now, friend John?'
Once more argumentative hostility woke within me. I could not accept such an overwhelming
idea as he suggested, so with an attempt to argue, of which I was even at the moment ashamed,
I said, she may have been placed here since last night. Indeed, that is so, and by whom?
I do not know. Someone has done it. And yet she has been dead one week. Most peoples in
that time would not look so. I had no answer for this, so was silent. Van Helsing did
not seem to notice my silence. At any rate he showed neither chagrin nor triumph. He
was looking intently at the face of the dead woman, raising the eyelids and looking at
the eyes, and once more opening the lips and examining the teeth. Then he turned to me
and said, "'Here there is one thing which is different from all recorded. Here is some
dual life that is not as the common. She was bitten by the vampire when she was in a trance,
sleep-walking. Oh, you start. You do not know that, friend John, but you shall know it later.
And in trance could he best come to take more blood. In trance she dies, and in trance she
is undead too. So it is that she differ from all other. Usually when the undead sleep at
home, as he spoke he made a comprehensive sweep of his arm to designate what to a vampire
was home, their face show what they are. But this so sweet that was when she not undead,
she go back to the nothings of the common dead. There is no malign there, see, and so
it make hard that I must kill her in her sleep.' This turned my blood cold, and it began to
upon me that I was accepting Van Helsing's theories. But if she were really dead, what
was there of terror in the idea of killing her? He looked up at me, and evidently saw
the change in my face, for he said almost joyously, "'Ah, you believe now?' I answered,
"'Do not press me too hard all at once. I am willing to accept. How will you do this
bloody work?' I shall cut off her head and fill her mouth with garlic, and I shall drive
a stake through her body.' It made me shudder to think of so mutilating the body of the
woman whom I had loved, and yet the feeling was not so strong as I had expected. I was
in fact beginning to shudder at the presence of this being, this undead as Van Helsing
called it, and to loathe it. Is it possible that love is all subjective, or all objective?'
I waited a considerable time for Van Helsing to begin, but he stood as if wrapped in thought.
Presently he closed the catch of his bag with a snap, and said, "'I have been thinking,
and have made up my mind as to what is best. If I did simply follow my inclining, I would
do now at this moment what is to be done. But there are other things to follow, and
things that are a thousand times more difficult, in that them we do not know. This is simple.
She have yet no life taken, though that is of time, and to act an hour would be to take
danger from her for ever. But then we may have to want Arthur, and how shall we tell
him of this? If you, who saw the wounds on Lucy's throat, and saw the wounds so similar
on the child's at the hospital, if you, who saw the coffin empty last night, and fall
to-day with a woman who have not changed, only to be more rose and more beautiful in
a whole week after she die, if you know of this, and know of the white figure last night
that brought the child to the churchyard, and yet of your own senses you did not believe,
how then can I expect Arthur, who know none of those things, to believe? He doubted me
when I took him from her kiss when she was dying. I know he has forgiven me because in
some mistaken idea I have done things that prevent him say good-bye as he ought. And
he may think that in some more mistaken idea this woman was buried alive, and that in most
mistake of all we have killed her. He will then argue back that it is we mistaken ones
that have killed her by our own ideas, and so he will be much unhappy always. Yet he
never can be sure, and that is the worst of all. And he will sometimes think that she
he loved was buried alive, and that will paint his dreams with horrors of what she
must have suffered, and again he will think that we may be right, and that his so beloved
was after all an undead. No, I told him once, and since then I learn much. Now since I know
it is all true, a hundred thousand times more do I know that he must pass through the bitter
waters to reach the sweet. He, poor fellow, must have one hour that will make the very
face of heaven grow black to him. Then we can act for good all round and send him peace.
My mind is made up. Let us go. You return home for tonight to your asylum, and see that
all be well. As for me, I shall spend the night here in this churchyard in my own way.
Tomorrow night you shall come to me to the Barkey Hotel at ten o'clock. I shall send
for Arthur to come too, and also that so fine young man of America that gave his blood.
Later we shall all have work to do. I come with you so far as Piccadilly and there Dine,
for I must be back here before the sun set. So we locked the tomb and came away, and got
over the wall of the churchyard, which was not much of a task, and drove back to Piccadilly.
Note left by Van Helsing in his portmanteau, Barkey Hotel, directed to John Seward, MD,
not delivered. 27th September. Friend John, I write this in case anything should happen.
I go alone to watch in that churchyard. It pleases me that the undead, Miss Lucy, shall
not leave tonight, so that on the morrow night she may be more eager. Therefore I shall fix
some things she like not, garlic and a crucifix, and so seal up the door of the tomb. She is
young as undead and will heed. Moreover, these are only to prevent her coming out. They will
not prevail on her wanting to get in, for then the undead is desperate, and must find
the line of least resistance whatsoever it may be. I shall be at hand all the night from
sunset till after sunrise, and if there be aught that may be learned, I shall learn it.
For Miss Lucy, or from her, I have no fear. But that other, to whom is there that she
is undead, he have not the power to seek her tomb and find shelter. He is cunning,
as I know from Mr Jonathan, and from the way that all along he have fooled us when he played
with us for Miss Lucy's life, and we lost, and in many ways the undead are strong. He
have always the strength in his hand of twenty men, even we four who gave our strength to
Miss Lucy, it also is all to him. Besides, he can summon his wolf, and I know not what.
So if it be that he come hither on this night, he shall find me, but none other shall until
it be too late. But it may be that he will not attempt the place. There is no reason
why he should. His hunting ground is more full of game than the churchyard where the
undead woman sleeps, and the one old man watch. Therefore I write this in case. Take the papers
that are with this, the diaries of Harker and the rest, and read them, and then find
this great undead, and cut off his head, and burn his heart, or drive a stake through it,
so that the world may rest from him. If it be so, farewell, Van Helsing.
Dr. Seward's Diary. 28th September.
It is wonderful what a good night's sleep will do for one. Yesterday I was almost willing
to accept Van Helsing's monstrous ideas, but now they seem to start out lurid before me,
as outrage is on common sense. I have no doubt that he believes it all. I wonder if his mind
can have become in any way unhinged. Surely there must be some rational explanation of
all these mysterious things. Is it possible that the Professor can have done it himself?
He is so abnormally clever that if he went off his head he would carry out his intent
with regard to some fixed idea in a wonderful way. I am loath to think it, and indeed it
would be almost as great a marvel as the other, to find that Van Helsing was mad.
But anyhow, I shall watch him carefully. I may get some light on the mystery.
29th September. Last night, at a little before ten o'clock,
Arthur and Quincy came into Van Helsing's room. He told us all what he wanted us to
do, but especially addressing himself to Arthur, as if all our wills were centred in his. He
began by saying that he hoped we would all come with him too, for, he said, there is
a grave duty to be done there. You were doubtless surprised at my letter. This query was directly
addressed to Lord Godelming. I was. It rather upset me for a bit. There has been so much
trouble around my house of late that I could do without any more. I have been curious too
as to what you mean. Quincy and I talked it over, but the more we talked the more puzzled
we got. Till now I can say for myself that I am about up a tree as to any meaning about
anything. Me too, said Quincy Morris, laconicly.
Oh, said the Professor, then you are nearer the beginning, both of you, than friend John
here, who has to go a long way back before he can ever get so far as to begin. It was
evident that he recognized my return to my old doubting frame of mind without my saying
a word. Then, turning to the other two, he said with intense gravity, I want your permission
to do what I think good this night. It is I know much to ask, and when you know what
it is I propose to do you will know, and only then how much. Therefore may I ask that
you promise me in the dark, so that afterwards, though you may be angry with me for a time,
I must not disguise from myself the possibility that such may be. You shall not blame yourselves
for anything. That's Frank anyhow, broke in Quincy. I'll answer for the Professor. I don't
quite see his drift, but I swear he's honest, and that's good enough for me.
I thank you, sir, said Van Helsing proudly. I have done myself the honor of counting you
one trusting friend, and such endorsement is dear to me. He held out a hand which Quincy
took. Then Arthur spoke out. Dr. Van Helsing, I don't quite like to buy a pig in a poke,
as they say in Scotland, and if it be anything in which my honor as a gentleman or my faith
as a Christian is concerned, I cannot make such a promise. If you can assure me that
what you intend does not violate either of these two, then I give my consent at once,
though for the life of me I cannot understand what you're driving at. I accept your limitation,
said Van Helsing, and all I ask of you is that if you feel it necessary to condemn any
act of mine, you will first consider it well and be satisfied that it does not violate
your reservations.
Agreed, said Arthur. That is only fair, and now that the poor parlors are over, may I
ask what it is we are to do? I want you to come with me and to come in secret to the
tomb.
Arthur's face fell, as he said in an amazed sort of way, where poor Lucy is buried. The
professor bowed. Arthur went on. And when there? To enter the tomb. Arthur stood up.
Professor, are you in earnest, or is it some monstrous joke? Pardon me, I see that you
are in earnest. He sat down again, but I could see that he sat firmly and proudly,
as one who is on his dignity. There was silence until he asked again. And when in the tomb?
To open the coffin. This is too much, he said, angrily rising again. I am willing to be patient
in all things that are reasonable, but in this, this desecration of the grave, of one
who—
He fairly choked with indignation. The professor looked pityingly at him.
If I could spare you one pang, my dear friend, he said, God knows I would. But this night
our feet must tread on thorny paths, or later, and for ever, the feet you love must walk
in paths of flame.
Arthur looked up with set white face and said, Take care, sir, take care.
Would it not be well to hear what I have to say? said Van Helsing. And then you will at
least know the limit of my purpose.
Shall I go on?
That's fair enough, broken Morris.
After a pause Van Helsing went on, evidently with an effort.
Miss Lucy is dead. Is it not so? Yes. Then there can be no wrong to her. But if she is
not dead—
Arthur jumped to his feet. Good God! he cried. What do you mean? Has there been any mistake?
Has she been buried alive? He groaned in anguish that not even hope could soften.
I did not say she was alive, my child. I did not think it. I go no further than to say
that she might be undead.
Undead? Not alive? What do you mean? Is this all a nightmare, or what is it?
There are mysteries which men can only guess at, which age by age they may solve only in
part. Believe me, we are now on the verge of one.
But I have not done. May I cut off the head of dead Miss Lucy?
Heavens and earth, no! cried Arthur in a storm of passion. Not for the wide world will I
consent to any mutilation of her dead body.
Dr Van Helsing, you try me too far. What have I done to you that you should torture me so?
What did that poor sweet girl do that you should want to cast such dishonour on her
grave? Are you mad that you speak such things, or am I mad to listen to them? Don't dare
think more of such a desecration. I shall not give my consent to anything you do. I
have a duty to do in protecting her grave from outrage, and by God I shall do it.
Van Helsing rose up from where he had all the time been seated, and said gravely and
sternly, My Lord Godelming, I, too, have a duty to do, a duty to others, a duty to you,
a duty to the dead, and by God I shall do it. All I ask you now is that you come with
me, that you look and listen, and if, when later I make the same request, you do not
be more eager for its fulfilment even than I am, then I shall do my duty, whatever it
may seem to me. And then, to follow your Lordship's wishes, I shall hold myself at your disposal
to render an account to you when and where you will.
His voice broke a little, and he went on with a voice full of pity, But I beseech you, do
not go forth in anger with me. In a long life of acts which were often not pleasant to do,
and which sometimes did ring my heart, I have never had so heavy a task as now. Believe
me, that if the time come for you to change your mind towards me, one look from you will
wipe away all this so sad hour, for I would do what a man can to save you from sorrow.
Just think, for why should I give myself so much labour and so much of sorrow? I have
come here from my own land to do what I can of good, at the first to please my friend
John, and then to help a sweet young lady whom too I come to love. For her, I am ashamed
to say so much, but I say it in kindness, I gave what you gave, the blood of my veins.
I gave it, I who was not like you her lover, but only her physician and her friend. I gave
her my nights and days, before death, after death, and if my death can do her good even
now when she is the dead undead, she shall have it freely.
He said this with a very grave, sweet pride, and Arthur was much affected by it. He took
the old man's hand and said in a broken voice, Oh, it is hard to think of it, and I cannot
understand, but at least I shall go with you and wait.
16. Dr. Seward's Diary.
CONTINUED
It was just a quarter before twelve o'clock when we got into the churchyard over the low wall.
The night was dark with occasional gleams of moonlight between the dents of the heavy clouds
that scutted across the sky. We all kept somehow close together with Van Helsing
slightly in front as he led the way. When we had come close to the tomb I looked well at Arthur,
for I feared the proximity to a place laden with so sorrowful a memory would upset him,
but he bore himself well. I took it that the very mystery of the proceeding was in some way
a counteractant to his grief. The Professor unlocked the door and, seeing a natural hesitation
amongst us for various reasons, solved the difficulty by entering first himself.
The rest of us followed and he closed the door. He then lit a dark lantern and pointed to a coffin.
Arthur stepped forward, hesitantly. Van Helsing said to me,
You were with me here yesterday. Was the body of Miss Lucy in that coffin?
It was. The Professor turned to the rest saying,
You here? And yet there is no one who does not believe with me.
He took his screwdriver and again took off the lid of the coffin. Arthur looked on, very pale and
silent. When the lid was removed he stepped forward. He evidently did not know there was
a laden coffin, or at any rate had not thought of it. When he saw the rent in the lid the blood
rushed to his face for an instant, but as quickly fell away again so that he remained of a ghastly
whiteness. He was still silent. Van Helsing forced back the laden flange and we all looked in
and recoiled. The coffin was empty. For several minutes no one spoke a word.
The silence was broken by Quincy Morris. Professor, I answered for you. Your word is all I want.
I wouldn't ask such a thing ordinarily. I wouldn't so dishonour you as to imply a doubt,
but this is a mystery that goes beyond all honour or dishonour. Is this your doing?
I swear to you by all that I hold sacred that I have not removed or touched her. What happened
was this. Two nights ago my friend Seward and I came here with good purpose, believe me.
I opened that coffin which was then sealed up and we found it as now empty. We then waited
and saw something white come through the trees. The next day we came here in daytime and she lay
there. Did she not, friend John? Yes. That night we were just in time.
One more so small child was missing and we find it, thank God, unharmed amongst the graves.
Yesterday I came here before sundown, for at sundown the undead can move. I waited here
all night till the sun rose, but I saw nothing. It was most probable that it was because I had
lain over the clamps of those doors garlic which the undead cannot bear, and other things which
they shun. Last night there was no exodus, so tonight before sundown I took away my garlic
and other things, and so it is we find this coffin empty. But bear with me. So far there is much
strange. Wait you with me outside, unseen and unheard, and things much stranger are yet to be.
So here he shut the dark slide of his lantern. Now to the outside. He opened the door and we
filed out, he coming last and locking the door behind him. Oh, but it seemed fresh and pure in
it was to see the clouds race by and the passing gleams of the moonlight between the scudding
crowds crossing and passing, like the gladness and sorrow of a man's life. How sweet it was to
breathe the fresh air that had no taint of death and decay, how humanizing to see the red lighting
of the sky beyond the hill, and to hear far away the muffled roar that marks the life of a great
city. Each in his own way was solemn and overcome. Arthur was silent and was, I could see,
striving to grasp the purpose and inner meaning of the mystery. I was myself tolerably patient and
half inclined again to throw aside doubt and to accept Van Helsing's conclusions. Quincy Morris
was phlegmatic in the way of a man who accepts all things and accepts them in the spirit of cool
bravery with hazard of all he has at stake. Not being able to smoke, he cut himself a good size
plug of tobacco and began to chew. As to Van Helsing, he was employed in a definite way.
First, he took from his bag a mass of what looked like thin wafer-like biscuit, which was carefully
rolled up in a white napkin. Next, he took out a double handful of some whitish stuff,
like dough or putty. He crumbled the wafer up fine and worked it into the mass between his hands.
This he then took, and rolling it into thin strips, began to lay them into the crevices
between the door and its setting in the tomb. I was somewhat puzzled by this, and being close,
asked him what it was that he was doing. Arthur and Quincy drew near also,
as they too were curious. He answered,
I am closing the tomb so that the undead may not enter.
And is that stuff you have there going to do it?
It is.
What is that which you are using? This time the question came by Arthur.
Van Helsing reverently lifted his hat as he answered,
The host, I brought it from Amsterdam. I have an indulgence.
It was an answer that appalled the most sceptical of us, and we felt individually that in the
presence of such earnest purpose as the Professor's, a purpose which could thus use the, to him,
most sacred of things, it was impossible to distrust. In respectful silence,
we took the places assigned to us close round the tomb, but hidden from sight of anyone approaching.
I pitied the others, especially Arthur. I had myself been apprenticed by my former
visits to this watching horror, and yet I, who had up to an hour ago repudiated the proofs,
felt my heart sink within me. Never did tombs look so ghastly white.
Never did cypress or yew or juniper seem the embodiment of funeral gloom.
Never did tree or grass wave or rustle so ominously.
Never did bow creak so mysteriously, and never did the faraway howling of dogs
send such a woeful presage through the night.
There was a long spell of silence, big, aching, void, and then from the Professor Rakeen,
he pointed, and far down the avenue of yews we saw a white figure advance, a dim white figure,
which held something dark at its breast. The figure stopped, and at the moment a startling
prominence, a dark-haired woman dressed in the seriments of the grave. We could not see
the face, for it was bent down over what we saw to be a fair-haired child. There was a pause,
and a sharp little cry such as a child gives in sleep, or a dog as it lies before the fire in
dreams. We were starting forward, but the Professor's warning hand, seen by us as he
stood behind the yew tree, kept us back, and then as we looked the white figure moved forwards again.
It was now near enough for us to see clearly, and the moonlight still held. My own heart grew
cold as ice, and I could hear the gasp of Arthur as we recognized the features of Lucy Westenra.
Lucy Westenra, but yet how changed! The sweetness was turned to adamantine, heartless cruelty,
and the purity to voluptuous wantonness. Van Helsing stepped out, and obedient to his gesture
we all advanced to. The four of us ranged in a line before the door of the tomb. Van Helsing
raised his lantern and drew the slide.
By the concentrated light that fell on Lucy's face we could see that lips were crimson with
fresh blood, and that the stream had trickled over her chin and stained the purity of her long death
robe. We shuddered with horror. I could see by the tremulous light that even Van Helsing's iron
nerve had failed. Arthur was next to me, and if I had not seized his arm and held him up
he would have fallen. When Lucy, I call the thing that was before us Lucy because it bore her shape,
saw us she drew back with an angry snarl such as a cat gives when taken unawares,
then her eyes ranged over us. Lucy's eyes in form and color, but Lucy's eyes
unclean and full of hellfire instead of the pure gentle orbs we knew. At that moment
the remnant of my love passed into hate and loathing. Had she then to be killed I could have
done it with savage delight. As she looked her eyes blazed with unholy light and the
face became wreathed with a voluptuous smile. Oh God how it made me shudder to see it!
With a careless motion she flung to the ground, callous as a devil, the child that up to now
she had clutched strenuously to her breast, growling over it as a dog growls over a bone.
The child gave a sharp cry and lay there moaning. There was a cold bloodedness in the act which
wrung a groan from Arthur. When she advanced to him with outstretched arms and a wanton smile he
fell back and hid his face in his hands. She still advanced however with a languorous,
voluptuous grace said, come to me Arthur, leave these others and come to me.
My arms are hungry for you, come and we can rest together, come my husband, come.
There was something diabolically sweet in her tones, something of the tinkling of glass once
struck which rang through the brains even of us who heard the words addressed to another.
As for Arthur he seemed under a spell. Moving his hands from his face he opened wide his arms.
She was leaping for them when Van Helsing sprang forward and held between them his little golden
crucifix. She recoiled from it and with a suddenly distorted face full of rage dashed past him as if
to enter the tomb. When within a foot or two of the door however she stopped, as if arrested by
some irresistible force, then she turned and her face was shown in a clear burst of moonlight and
by the lamp which had now no quiver from Van Helsing's nerves. Never did I see such baffled
malice on a face and never, I trust, shall such ever be seen again by my mortal eyes.
The beautiful colour became livid, the eyes seemed to throw out sparks of hellfire,
the brows were wrinkled as though the folds of flesh were the coils of Medusa's snakes and the
lovely blood-stained mouth grew to an open square as in the passion masks of the Greeks and Japanese.
If ever a face meant death, if looks could kill, we saw it at that moment.
And so for full half a minute, which seemed in eternity, she remained between the lifted
crucifix and the sacred closing of her means of entry. Van Helsing broke the silence by asking
Arthur. Answer me, oh my friend, am I to proceed in my work? Do as you will, friend, do as you will,
there can be no horror like this ever any more, and he groaned in spirit.
Quincy and I simultaneously moved towards him and took his arms. We could hear the click of
the closing lantern as Van Helsing held it down. Coming close to the tomb, he began to remove from
the chink some of the sacred emblem which he had placed there. We all looked on with horrified
amazement as we saw when he stood back, the woman, with a corporeal body as real at that moment as
our own, pass through the interstice where a scarce knife-blade could have gone. We all felt
glad sense of relief when we saw the Professor calmly restoring the strings of putty to the edges
of the door. When this was done, he lifted the child and said, Come now, my friends,
we can do no more till tomorrow. There is a funeral at noon, so here we shall all come before long
after that. The friends of the dead will all be gone by two, and when the sexton locks the gate
we shall remain. Then there is more to do, but not like this of tonight. As for this little one,
he is not much harmed, and by tomorrow night he shall be well. We shall leave him where the police
will find him, as on the other night, and then to home. Coming close to Arthur, he said,
My friend Arthur, you have had a sore trial, but after, when you look back,
you will see how it was necessary. You are now in the bitter waters, my child.
By this time tomorrow you will, please God, have passed them, and have drunk of the sweet water,
so do not mourn over much. Till then, I shall not ask you to forgive me. Arthur and Quincy came home
with me, and we tried to cheer each other on the way. We had left behind the child in safety and
tired, so we all slept with more or less reality of sleep.
29 September Night
A little before twelve o'clock we three, Arthur, Quincy Morris, and myself, called for the
Professor. It was odd to notice that, by common consent, we had all put on black clothes.
Of course Arthur wore black, for he was in deep mourning, but the rest of us wore it by instinct.
We got to the graveyard by half past one and strolled about, keeping out of official observation,
so that when the gravediggers had completed their task and the sexton,
under the belief that everyone had gone, had locked the gate, we had the place all to ourselves.
Van Helsing, instead of his little black bag, had with him a long leather one, something like a
cricketing bag. It was manifestly of fair weight. When we were alone and had heard the last of the
footsteps die out up the road, we silently, as if by ordered intention, followed the Professor to the
tomb. He unlocked the door and we entered, closing it behind us. Then he took from his bag the lantern
which he lit, and also two wax candles which, when lighted, he stuck by melting their own ends on
other coffins, so that they might give light sufficient to work by. When he again lifted the
lid off Lucy's coffin, we all looked, Arthur trembling like an aspen, and saw that the corpse
lay there in all its deadly beauty. But there was no love in my own heart, nothing but loathing for
the foul thing which had taken Lucy's shape without her soul. I could see even Arthur's face grow hard
as he looked. Presently, he said to Van Helsing, is this really Lucy's body, or only a demon in her
shape? It is her body, and yet not it. But wait a while, and you shall see her as she was, and is.
She seemed like a nightmare of Lucy as she lay there, the pointed teeth, the blood-stained,
voluptuous mouth, which made one shudder to see the whole carnal and unspirited appearance,
seeming like a devilish mockery of Lucy's sweet purity. Van Helsing, with his usual methodicalness,
began taking the various contents from his bag and placing them ready for use. First he took out
a soldering iron, and some plumbing solder, and then a small oil lamp which gave out when lit in
the corner of the tomb, gas which burned at a fierce heat with a blue flame, then his operating
knives which he placed to hand, and last a round wooden stake, some two and a half or three inches
thick and about three feet long. One end of it was hardened by charring in the fire and was sharpened
to a fine point. With this stake came a heavy hammer, such as in households as used in the coal
for breaking the lumps. To me, a doctor's preparations for work of any kind of stimulating,
embracing, but the effect of these things on both Arthur and Quincy was to cause them a sort of
consternation. They both, however, kept their courage and remained silent and quiet.
When all was ready, Van Helsing said,
Before we do anything, let me tell you this.
It is out of the lore and experience of the ancients and of all those who have studied the
powers of the undead. When they become such, there comes with the chance the curse of immortality.
They cannot die, but must go on, age after age, adding new victims and multiplying the evils of
the world. For all that die from the praying of the undead become themselves undead and pray on
their kind. And so the circle goes on, ever widening, like as the ripples from a stone thrown in the
water. Friend Arthur, if you had met that kiss which you know of before poor Lucy die, or again,
last night when you open your arms to her, you would in time, when you had died, have become
Nosferatu, as they call it in Eastern Europe, and would for all time make many more of those undeads
that so have filled us with horror. The career of this so unhappy dear lady has but just begun.
Those children whose blood she sucked are not as yet so much the worst, but if she lives on,
more and more they lose their blood, and by her power over them they come to her, and so she draw
their blood with that so wicked mouth. But if she die in truth, then all cease. The tiny wounds of
the throats disappear, and they go back to their play, unknowing ever of what has been.
But of the most blessed of all, when this now undead be made to rest as true dead,
then the soul of the poor lady whom we love shall again be free. Instead of working wickedness by
night, and growing more debased in the assimilating of it by day, she shall take her place with the
other angels, so that, my friend, it will be a blessed hand for her that shall strike the blow
that sets her free. To this I am willing. But is the nun amongst us who has a better right?
Will it be no joy to think of hereafter in the silence of the night when sleep is not?
It was my hand that sent her to the stars. It was the hand of him that loved her best.
The hand that of all she would herself have chosen had it been to her to choose.
Tell me if there is one such amongst us.
We all looked at Arthur. He saw, too, what we all did, the infinite kindness which suggested that his
should be the hand which would restore Lucy to us as a holy and not unholy memory.
He stepped forward and said bravely, though his hand trembled and his face was pale as snow,
My true friend, from the bottom of my broken heart I thank you.
Tell me what I am to do and I shall not falter.
Van Helsing laid a hand on his shoulder and said, Brave lad, a moment's courage and it is done.
This stake must be driven through her. It will be a fearful ordeal. Be not deceived in that.
But it will only be a short time, and you will then rejoice more than your pain was great.
From this grim tomb you will emerge as though you tread on air, but you must not falter
when once you have begun. Only think that we, your true friends, are round you,
and that we pray for you all the time.
Go on, said Arthur hoarsely. Tell me what I am to do.
Take this stake in your left hand, ready to place the point over the heart and then the
hammer in your right. Then when we begin our prayer for the dead I shall read him.
I have here the book, and the others shall follow. Strike in God's name, that so all may be well with
dead that we love, and that the undead pass away. Arthur took the stake in the hammer,
and when once his mind was set on action his hands never trembled nor even quivered.
Van Helsing opened his missile and began to read, and Quincy and I followed as well we could.
Arthur placed the point over the heart, and as I looked I could see its dint in the white flesh.
Then he struck with all his might.
The thing in the coffin writhed, and a hideous blood-curdling screech came from the open red
lips. The body shook and quivered and twisted in wild contortions. The sharp teeth champed
together till the lips were cut, and the mouth was smeared with a crimson foam. But Arthur
never faltered. He looked like a figure of Thor as his untumbling arm rose and fell,
driving deeper and deeper the mercy-bearing stake whilst the blood from the pierced heart
welled and spurted up around it. His face was set, and high duty seemed to shine through it.
The sight of it gave us courage so that our voices seemed to ring through the little vault,
and then the writhing and quivering of the body became less, and the teeth seemed to champ,
and the face to quiver. Finally it lay still.
The terrible task was over.
The hammer fell from Arthur's hand. He reeled and would have fallen had we not caught him.
The great drops of sweat sprang from his forehead, and his breath came in broken gasps.
It had indeed been an awful strain on him, and had he not been forced to his task by more than
human considerations, he could never have gone through with it. For a few minutes we were so
taken up with him that we did not look toward the coffin. When we did, however, a murmur of
startled surprise ran from one to the other of us. We gazed so eagerly that Arthur rose,
for he had been seated on the ground, and came and looked too, and then a glad strange light
broke over his face and dispelled altogether the gloom of horror that lay upon it. There,
in the coffin, lay no longer the foul thing that we had so dreaded and grown to hate
that the work of her destruction was yield as a privilege, the one best entitled to it,
but Lucy, as we had seen her in life with her face of unequal sweetness and purity.
True that there were there, as we had seen them in life, the traces of care and pain and waste,
but these were all dear to us, for they marked her truth to what we knew.
One and all we felt that the holy calm that lay like sunshine over the wasted face and
form was only an earthly token and symbol of the calm that was to reign forever.
Van Helsing came and laid his hand on Arthur's shoulder and said to him,
And now, Arthur, my friend dear lad, am I not forgiven?
The reaction of terrible strain came as he took the old man's hand in his,
raised it to his lips, pressed it and said, Forgiven! God bless you,
that you have given my dear one her soul again, and me peace.
He put his hands on the professor's shoulders and, laying his head on his breast, cried
for a while, silently, whilst we stood, unmoving. When he raised his head, Van Helsing said to him,
And now, my child, you may kiss her, kiss her dead lips, if you will, as she would have you to,
if for her to choose, for she is not a grinning devil now, not any more a foul thing for all
eternity, no longer. She is the devil's undead, she is God's true dead, whose soul is with him.
Arthur bent and kissed her, and then we sent him and Quincy out of the tomb.
The professor and I saw the top off the stake, leaving the point of it in the body.
Then we cut off the head and filled the mouth with garlic. We started up the leaden coffin,
screwed on the coffin lid, and gathered up our belongings, came away.
When the professor locked the door, he gave the key to Arthur.
Outside, the air was sweet, the sun shone and the birds sang, and it seemed as if all nature were
tuned to a different pitch. There was gladness and mirth and peace everywhere, for we were at
rest ourselves on one account, and we were glad, though it was with a tempered joy.
Before we moved away, Van Helsing said, Now, my friends, one step of our work is done,
one the most harrowing to ourselves, but there remains a greater task, to find out the author
of all this our sorrow, and to stamp him out. I have clues which we can follow, but it is a
danger in it, and pain. Shall you not all help me? We have learned to believe, all of us.
Is it not so? And since so, do we not see our duty? Yes, and do we not promise to go on to the bitter
end? Each in turn we took his hand, and the promise was made. Then said the professor as
we moved off. Two nights hence you shall meet with me and dine together at seven o'clock with
friend John. I shall entreat two others, two that you know not as yet, and I shall be ready to all
our work show and our plans unfold. Friend John, you come with me home, for I have much to consult
you about, and you can help. Tonight I leave for Amsterdam, but shall return to-morrow night.
And then begins our great quest. But first I shall have much to say, so that you may know what to do
and what to dread. Then our promise shall be made to each other anew, but there is a terrible task
before us, and once our feet are on the plowshare, we must not draw back.
Doctor Seward's diary continued.
When we arrived at the Berkeley Hotel, Van Helsing found a telegram waiting for him.
I'm coming up by train. Jonathan at Whitby. Important news. Mina Harker. The Professor was delighted.
Ah, that wonderful Madame Mina, he said. Pearl among women. She arrive, but I cannot stay.
She must go to your house, friend John. You must meet her at the station.
Telegraph her en route, so that she may be prepared.
When the wire was dispatched, he had a cup of tea.
Over it, he told me of a diary kept by Jonathan Harker when abroad, and gave me a typewritten copy of it, as also of Mrs Harker's diary at Whitby.
Take these, he said, and study them well. When I have returned, you will be master of all the facts, and we can then better enter on our inquisition.
Keep them safe, for there is in them much of treasure.
You will need all your faith, even you who have had such an experience as that of today.
What is here told? He laid his hand heavily and gravely on the packet of papers as he spoke.
May be the beginning of the end to you and me and many another, or it may sound the knell of the undead who walk the earth.
Read all, I pray you, with the open mind, and if you can add in any way to the story here told, do so, for it is all important.
You have kept a diary of all these so strange things, is it not so?
Yes, then we shall go through all these together when we meet.
He then made ready for his departure, and shortly drove off to Liverpool Street.
I took my way to Paddington, where I arrived about fifteen minutes before the train came in.
The crowd melted away after the bustling fashion common to arrival platforms, and I was beginning to feel uneasy lest I might miss my guest,
when a sweet-faced dainty-looking girl stepped up to me, and after a quick glance said,
Doctor Seward, is it not?
And you are Mrs Harker, I answered at once, whereupon she held out her hand.
I knew you from the description of poor dear Lucy, but she stopped suddenly, and a quick blush overspread her face.
The blush that rose to my own cheeks somehow set us both at ease, for it was a tacit answer to her own.
I got her luggage, which included a typewriter, and we took the underground to Fenchurch Street,
after I had sent a wire to my housekeeper to have a sitting-room and a bedroom prepared at once for Mrs Harker.
In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the place was a lunatic asylum,
but I could see that she was unable to repress her shudder when we entered.
She told me that, if she might, she would come presently to my study, and she had much to say.
So, here I am, finishing my entry in my phonograph diary, whilst I await her.
As yet, I have not had the chance of looking at the papers which Van Helsing left with me, though they lie open before me.
I must get her interested in something, so that I may have an opportunity of reading them.
She does not know how precious time is, or what a task we have in hand.
I must be careful not to frighten her. Here she is.
Mina Harker's Journal. 29th September.
After I had tidied myself, I went down to Dr Seward's study.
At the door I paused a moment, for I thought I heard him talking with someone.
As, however, he had pressed me to be quick, I knocked at the door, and, on his calling out, come in, I entered.
To my intense surprise, there was no one with him.
He was quite alone, and on the table opposite him was what I knew at once from the description to be a phonograph.
I had never seen one, and was much interested.
I hope I did not keep you waiting, I said.
But I stayed at the door, as I heard you talking, and thought there was someone with you.
Oh, he replied with a smile. I was only entering my diary.
Your diary? I asked him in surprise.
Yes, he answered. I keep it in this.
As he spoke, he laid his hand on the phonograph.
I felt quite excited over it, and blurted out, Why, this beats even shorthand.
May I hear it say something?
Certainly, he replied with alacrity, and stood up to put it in train for speaking.
Then he paused, and a troubled look overspread his face.
The fact is, he began awkwardly, I only keep my diary in it, and as it is entirely, almost entirely, about my cases, it may be awkward.
That is, I mean, he stopped, and I tried to help him out of his embarrassment.
You helped to attend dear Lucy at the end. Let me hear how she died. For all that I know of her, I shall be very grateful.
She was very, very dear to me.
To my surprise, he answered, with a horostruck look in his face, Tell you of her death, not for the wide world.
Why not? I asked, for some grave terrible feeling was coming over me.
Again he paused, and I could see that he was trying to invent an excuse.
At length, he stammered out, You see, I do not know how to pick out any particular part of the diary.
Even while he was speaking, an idea dawned upon him.
And, he said, with an unconscious simplicity, in a quite different voice, and with the naivety of a child,
That's quite true. Upon my honour. Honest Indian.
I could not but smile, at which he grimaced.
I gave myself away that time, he said.
But do you know that although I have kept the diary for months past,
It never once struck me how I was going to find any particular part of it, in case I wanted to look it up.
By this time, my mind was made up that the diary of a doctor who attended Lucy
Might have something to add to the sum of our knowledge of that terrible being.
And I said, boldly, Then, Dr. Seward, you had better let me copy it out for you, on my typewriter.
He grew to a positively deftly pallor, as he said, No, no, no, for all the world, I wouldn't let you know that terrible story.
Then it was terrible. My intuition was right.
For a moment I thought, and as my eyes ranged the room, unconsciously looking for something, or some opportunity to aid me,
They lit on the great batch of typewriting on the table.
His eyes caught the look in mine, and without his thinking followed their direction.
As he saw the parcel, he realized my meaning.
You do not know me, I said.
When you have read these papers, my own diary, and my husband's also, which I have typed, you will know me better.
I have not faltered in giving every thought of my own heart in this cause.
But, of course, you do not know me yet, and I must not expect you to trust me so far.
He is certainly a man of noble nature. Poor dear Lucy was right about him.
He stood up and opened a large drawer, in which were arranged, in order, a number of hollow cylinders of metal, covered with dark wax, and said,
You are quite right. I did not trust you, because I did not know you, but I know you now, and let me say that I should have known you long ago.
I know that Lucy told you of me. She told me of you, too.
May I make the only atonement in my power?
Take the cylinders, and hear them. The first half-dozen of them are personal to me, and they will not horrify you.
Then you will know me better.
Dinner will by then be ready. In the meantime, I shall read over some of these documents, and shall be better able to understand certain things.
He carried the phonograph himself up to my sitting-room, and adjusted it for me.
Now I shall learn something pleasant, I am sure, for it will tell me the other side of a true love episode of which I know one side already.
Dr. Seward's Diary, 29th September
I was so absorbed in that wonderful diary of Jonathan Harker, and that of his wife, that I let the time run on without thinking.
Mrs. Harker was not down when the maid came to announce dinner, so I said, She is possibly tired, let dinner wait an hour, and I went on with my work.
I had just finished Mrs. Harker's diary, when she came in.
She looked sweetly pretty, but very sad, and her eyes were flushed with crying. This somehow moved me much.
Of late I have had cause for tears, God knows, but the relief of them was denied me, and now the sight of those sweet eyes, brightened by recent tears, went straight to my heart.
So, I said as gently as I could, I greatly fear I have distressed you.
Oh no, not distressed me, she replied, but I have been more touched than I can say by your grief. That is a wonderful machine, but it is cruelly true.
It told me, in its very tones, the anguish of your heart. It was like a soul crying out to Almighty God. No one must hear them spoken ever again.
See, I have tried to be useful. I have copied out the words on my typewriter, and none of her need now hear your heartbeat as I did.
No one need ever know, shall ever know, I said in a low voice.
She laid her hand on mine, and said, very gravely, Ah, but they must.
Must? But why? I asked.
Because it is a part of the terrible story, a part of poor Lucy's death, and all that led to it.
Because, in the struggle which we have before us, to rid the earth of this terrible monster, we must have all the knowledge, and all the help, which we can get.
I think that the cylinders which you gave me contained more than you intended me to know, but I can see that there are, in your record, many lights to this dark mystery.
You will let me help, will you not? I know all up to a certain point, and I see already that your diary only took me to the 7th of September, how poor Lucy was beset, and how her terrible doom was being wrought out.
Jonathan and I have been working day and night since Professor Van Helsing saw us.
He has gone to Whitby to get more information, and he will be here tomorrow to help us.
We need to have no secrets amongst us. Working together, and with absolute trust, we can surely be stronger than if some of us were in the dark.
She looked at me so appealingly, and at the same time manifested such courage and resolution in her bearing, that I gave in at once to her wishes.
You shall, I said, do as you like in the matter. God forgive me if I do wrong.
There are terrible things yet to learn of, but if you have so far travelled on the road to poor Lucy's death, you will not be content, I know, to remain in the dark.
Nay, the end, the very end, may give you a gleam of peace.
Come, there is dinner. We must keep one another strong for what is before us. We have a cruel and dreadful task.
When you have eaten, you shall learn the rest, and I shall answer any questions you ask, if there be anything which you do not understand, though it was apparent to us who were present.
Mina Harker's Journal, 29th September
After dinner, I came with Dr Seward to his study.
He brought back the phonograph from my room, and I took a chair and arranged the phonograph so that I could touch it without getting up, and showed me how to stop it in case I should want to pause.
Then he very thoughtfully took a chair with his back to me, so that I might be as free as possible, and began to read.
I put the forked metal to my ears and listened.
When the terrible story of Lucy's death and all that followed was done, I lay back in my chair, powerless.
Fortunately, I am not of a fainting disposition.
When Dr Seward saw me, he jumped up with a horrified exclamation, and, hurriedly taking a case bottle from the cupboard, gave me some brandy, which, in a few minutes, somewhat restored me.
My brain was all in a whirl, and only that there came, through all the multitude of horrors, the holy ray of light that my dear Lucy was at last at peace, I do not think that I could have borne it without making a scene.
It is all so wild and mysterious, and strange, that if I had not known Jonathan's experience in Transylvania, I could not have believed.
As it was, I didn't know what to believe, and so got out of my difficulty by attending to something else.
I took the cover off my typewriter, and said to Dr Seward,
Let me write this all out now. We must be ready for Dr Van Helsing when he comes.
I have sent a telegram to Jonathan to come on here when he arrives in London from Whitby.
In this matter, dates are everything, and I think that if we get all of our material ready, and to have every item put in chronological order, we shall have done much.
You tell me that Lord Goodalming and Mr Morris are coming too. Let us be able to tell them when they come.
He accordingly set the phonograph at a slow pace, and I began to type-write from the beginning of the seventeenth cylinder.
I used manifold, and so took three copies of the diary, just as I had done with the rest.
It was late when I got through, but Dr Seward went about his work of going his round of the patients.
When he had finished, he came back and sat near me, reading, so that I did not feel too lonely whilst I worked.
How good and thoughtful he is! The world seems full of good men, even if there are monsters in it.
Before I left him, I remembered what Jonathan put in his diary of the professor's perturbation at reading something in an evening paper at the station at Exeter.
So, seeing that Dr Seward keeps his newspapers, I borrowed the files of the Westminster Gazette and the Pall Mall Gazette, and took them to my room.
I remember how much the Daily Graph and the Whitby Gazette, of which I had made cuttings, had helped us to understand the terrible events at Whitby when Count Dracula landed.
So I shall look through the evening papers since then, and perhaps I shall get some new light. I am not sleepy, and the work will help to keep me quiet.
Dr Seward's Diary
30th September
Mr Harker arrived at nine o'clock. He got his wife's wire just before starting. He is uncommonly clever, if one can judge from his face, and full of energy.
If this journal be true, and judging by one's own wonderful experiences it must be, he is also a man of great nerve.
That going down to the vault a second time was a remarkable piece of daring. After reading his account of it, I was prepared to meet a good specimen of manhood, but hardly the quiet businesslike gentleman who came here today.
Later
After lunch, Harker and his wife went back to their own room, and as I passed a while ago, I heard the click of the typewriter. They are hard at it.
Mrs Harker says that they are knitting together, in chronological order, every scrap of evidence they have.
Harker has got the letters between the consignee of the boxes at Whitby, and the carriers in London who took charge of them. He is now reading his wife's transcript of my diary. I wonder what they will make out of it.
Here it is. Strange that it never struck me that the very next house might be the Count's hiding place. Goodness knows that we had enough clues from the conduct of the patient Renfield.
The bundle of letters relating to the purchase of the house were with the transcript. Oh, if we had only had them earlier, we might have saved poor Lucy. Stop! That way madness lies.
Harker has gone back, and is again collecting material. He says that by dinnertime they will be able to show a whole connected narrative. He thinks that in the meantime I should see Renfield, as hitherto he has been a sort of index to the coming and going of the Count.
I hardly see this yet, but when I get at the dates I suppose I shall. What a good thing that Mrs Harker put my cylinders into type. We never could have found the dates otherwise.
I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room, with his hands folded, smiling benignly. At the moment he seemed as sane as anyone I ever saw. I sat down and talked with him on a lot of subjects, all of which he treated naturally.
He then, of his own accord, spoke of going home, a subject he has never mentioned to my knowledge during his sojourn here. In fact he spoke quite confidently of getting his discharge at once.
I believe that had I not had the chat with Harker and read the letters and the dates of his outbursts, I should have been prepared to sign for him after a brief time of observation.
As it is, I am darkly suspicious. All those outbreaks were in some way linked with the proximity of the Count. What then does this absolute content mean? Can it be that his instinct is satisfied as to the Vampire's ultimate triumph?
Stay. He is himself Zufagus, and in his wild ravings outside the chapel door of the deserted house, he always spoke of Master. This all seems confirmation of our idea.
However, after a while I came away. My friend is just a little too sane at present to make it safe to probe him too deep with questions. He might begin to think, and then...
So I came away. I mistrust these quiet moods of his, so I have given the attendant a hint to look closely after him and to have a straight waistcoat ready in case of need.
Jonathan Harker's Journal. 29th September. In train to London.
When I received Mr. Billington's courteous message that he would give me any information in his power, I thought it best to go down to Whitby and make, on the spot, such inquiries as I wanted.
It was now my object to trace that horrid cargo of the Count's to its place in London. Later we may be able to deal with it.
Billington Jr., a nice lad, met me at the station and brought me to his father's house, where they had decided that I must spend the night. They are hospitable, with true Yorkshire hospitality.
Give a guest everything and leave him to do as he likes. They all knew that I was busy and that my stay was short, and Mr. Billington had ready, in his office, all the papers concerning the consignment of boxes.
It gave me almost a turn to see again one of the letters which I had seen at the Count's table, before I knew of his diabolical plans.
Everything had been carefully thought out and done systematically and with precision. He seems to have been prepared for every obstacle which might be placed by accident in the way of his intentions being carried out.
To use an Americanism, he had taken no chances, and the absolute accuracy with which his instructions were fulfilled was simply the logical result of his care.
I saw the invoice and took note of it. 50 cases of Common Earth to be used for experimental purposes. Also the copy of the letter to Carter Paterson, and their reply. Of both these I got copies.
This was all the information Mr. Billington could give me, so I went down to the port and saw the Coast Guards, the Customs Officers and the Harbour Master, who kindly put me in communication with the men who had actually received the boxes.
Their tally was exact with the list, and they had nothing to add to the simple description, 50 cases of Common Earth, except that the boxes were main and mortal heavy, and that shifting them was dry work.
One of them added that it was hard lines that there wasn't any gentleman such like as like yourself, Squire, to show some sort of appreciation of their efforts in a liquid form.
Another put in a rider that the first then generated was such that even the time which had elapsed had not completely elated.
Needless to add, I took care before leaving to lift, forever and adequately, this source of reproach.
30th September. The Station Master was good enough to give me a line to his old companion, the Station Master at King's Cross, so that when I arrived there in the morning, I was able to ask him about the arrival of the boxes.
He, too, put me at once in communication with the proper officials, and I saw that their tally was correct with the original invoice.
The opportunities of acquiring an abnormal first had been, here, limited. A noble use of them had, however, been made, and again I was compelled to deal with the result in ex post facto manner.
From thence I went to Carter Paterson's central office, where I met with the utmost courtesy. They looked up the transaction in their day book and letter book, and at once telephoned to their King's Cross office for more details.
By good fortune, the men who did the teaming were waiting for work, and the official at once sent them over, sending also, by one of them, the way bill and all the papers connected with the delivery of the boxes at Carfax.
Here, again, I found the tally agreeing exactly.
The carrier's men were able to supplement the paucity of the written words with a few more details. These were, I shortly found, connected almost solely with the dusty nature of the job, and the consequent first engendered in the operators.
On my affording an opportunity, through the medium of the currency of the realm, of the allaying at a later period this beneficial evil, one of the men remarked,
That airhouse, Governor, is the rummiest I ever was in. Blimey, but it ain't been touched since a hundred years. There was just that thick in the place that you might have slept on it without hurting of your bones.
And the place was that neglected that you might have smelled old Jerusalem in it. But the old chapel, that took the sight that did. Me and my mate, we thought we wouldn't never get out quick enough, or I wouldn't take less nor a quid a moment to stay there out of dark.
Having been in the house, I could well believe him. But if he knew what I know, he would, I think, have raised his terms.
Of one thing I am now satisfied, that all those boxes which arrived at Whitby from Varna in the Demeter were safely deposited in the old chapel at Carfax.
There should be fifty of them there, unless any have since been removed, as from Dr. Seward's diary, I fear.
Later, Mina and I have worked all day, and we have put all the papers into order.
Mina Harker's Journal. 30th September. I am so glad that I hardly know how to contain myself.
It is, I suppose, the reaction from the haunting fear which I have had that this terrible affair and the reopening of his old wound might act detrimentally on Jonathan.
I saw him leave for Whitby with as brave a face as could, but I was sick with apprehension.
The effort has, however, done him good. He was never so resolute, never so strong, never so full of volcanic energy as at present.
It is just as that good, dear Professor Van Helsing said. He is true grit, and he improves under strain that would kill a weaker nature.
He came back full of life and hope and determination. We have got everything in order for tonight.
I feel myself quite wild of excitement. I suppose one ought to pity anything so hunted as the Count.
That is just it. This thing is not human, not even a beast.
To read Dr. Seward's diary of poor Lucy's death and what followed is enough to dry up the springs of pity in one's heart.
Later, Lord Godalming and Mr. Morris arrived earlier than we expected.
Dr. Seward was out on business and had taken Jonathan with him, so I had to see them.
It was, to me, a painful meeting, for it brought back all poor dear Lucy's hopes of only a few months ago.
Of course, they had heard Lucy speak of me, and it seemed that Dr. Van Helsing, too, had been quite blowing my trumpet, as Mr. Morris expressed it.
Poor fellows, neither of them is aware that I know all about the proposals they made to Lucy.
They did not quite know what to say or do, as they were ignorant of the amount of my knowledge, so they had to keep on neutral subjects.
However, I thought the matter over and came to the conclusion that the best thing I could do would be to post them on affairs right up to date.
I knew from Dr. Seward's diary that they had been at Lucy's death, a real death, and that I need not fear to betray any secret before the time.
So I told them, as well as I could, that I had read all the papers and diaries and that my husband and I, having typewritten them, had just finished putting them into order.
I gave them each a copy to read in the library. When Lord Godalming got it and turned it over, it does make a pretty good pile.
He said, Did you write all this, Mrs. Harker? I nodded, and he went on.
I don't quite see the drift of it, but you people are all so good and kind and have been working so earnestly and so energetically that all I can do is to accept your ideas blindfold and try to help you.
I have had one lesson already in accepting facts that should make a man humble to the last hour of his life.
Besides, I know you loved my Lucy.
Here he turned away and covered his face with his hands. I could hear the tears in his voice.
Mr. Morris, with instinctive delicacy, just laid a hand for a moment on his shoulder and then walked quietly out of the room.
I suppose there is something in a woman's nature that makes a man free to break down before her and express his feelings on the tender or emotional side without feeling it derogatory to his manhood.
For, when Lord Godalming found himself alone with me, he sat down on the sofa and gave way utterly and openly.
I sat down beside him and took his hand.
I hope he didn't think it forward of me, and that if he ever thinks of it afterwards he will never have such a thought.
There I rang him. I know he never will. He is too true a gentleman.
I said to him, for I could see that his heart was breaking.
I loved dear Lucy, and I know what she was to you and what you were to her.
She and I were like sisters, and now she is gone.
Will you not let me be like a sister to you in your trouble?
I know what sorrows you have had, though I cannot measure the depth of them.
If sympathy and pity can help in your affliction, won't you let me be of some little service for Lucy's sake?
In an instant the poor dear fellow was overwhelmed with grief.
It seemed to me that all that he had of late been suffering in silence found a vent at once.
He grew quite hysterical, and, raising his open hands, beat his palms together in a perfect agony of grief.
He stood up, and then sat down again, and the tears rained down his cheeks.
I felt an infinite pity for him, and opened my arms unthinkingly.
With a sob, he laid his head on my shoulder, and cried like a weary child, whilst he shook with emotion.
We women have something of the mother in us that makes us rise above smaller matters when the mother spirit is invoked.
I felt this big, sorrowing man's head resting on me, as though it were that of a baby that some day may lie on my bosom,
and I stroked his hair as though he were my own child.
I never thought at the time how strange it all was.
After a little bit, his sob ceased, and he raised himself with an apology, though he made no disguise of his emotion.
He told me that for days and nights past, weary days and sleepless nights, he had been unable to speak with anyone as a man must speak in his time of sorrow.
There was no woman whose sympathy could be given to him, or with whom, owing to the terrible circumstances with which his sorrow was surrounded, he could speak freely.
I know now how I suffered, he said, as he dried his eyes.
But I do not know even yet, and none other can ever know, how much your sweet sympathy has been to me today.
I shall know better in time, and believe me that though I am not ungrateful now, my gratitude will grow with my understanding.
You will let me be like a brother, will you not, for all our lives, for dear Lucy's sake?
For dear Lucy's sake, I said, as we clasped hands.
I, and for your own sake, he added, for, if a man's esteem and gratitude are ever worth the winning, you have won mine today.
If ever the future should bring to you a time when you need a man's help, believe me, you will not call in vain.
God grant that no such time may ever come to you to break the sunshine of your life, but if it should ever come, promise me that you will let me know.
He was so earnest, and his sorrow was so fresh, that I felt it would comfort him.
So I said, I promise. As I came along the corridor, I saw Mr. Morris looking out of a window.
He turned as he heard my footsteps.
How is Art? he said.
Then, noticing my red eyes, he went on.
Ah, I see you have been comforting him.
Poor old fellow, he needs it.
No one but a woman can help a man when he is in trouble of the heart, and he had no one to comfort him.
He bore his own trouble so bravely that my heart bled for him.
I saw the manuscript in his hand, and I knew that when he read it, he would realize how much I knew.
So I said to him, I wish I could comfort all who suffer from the heart.
Will you let me be your friend, and will you come to me for comfort if you need it?
You will know later why I speak.
He saw that I was in earnest, and stooping, took my hand, and, raising it to his lips, kissed it.
It seemed poor comfort to so brave an unselfish a soul, and impulsively, I bent over and kissed him.
The tears rose in his eyes, and there was a momentary choking in his throat.
He said, quite calmly,
Little girl, you will never forget that true-hearted kindness so long as ever you live.
Then he went into the study to his friend.
Little girl, the very words he had used to Lucy, and oh, but he proved himself a friend.
Dr C. Wood's Diary, 30th September. I got home at five o'clock, and found that
Godelming and Morris had not only arrived, but had already studied the transcript of
various diaries and letters, which Harker had not yet returned from his visit to the
Carrier's Men, of whom Dr Hennessy had written to me. Mrs Harker gave us a cup of tea, and
I can honestly say that, for the first time since I have lived in it, this old house seemed
like home. When we had finished tea, Mrs Harker said,
Dr C. Wood, may I ask a favour? I want to see your patient, Mr Renfield. Do let me see
him. What you have said of him in your diary interests me so much.
She looked so appealing and so pretty that I could not refuse her, and there was no possible
reason why I should, so I took her with me. When I went into the room, I told the man
that a lady would like to see him, to which he simply answered, Why? She is going through
the house and wants to see everyone in it, I said. Oh, very well, he said. Let her come
in by all means, but just wait a minute till I tidy up the place.
His method of tidying was peculiar. He simply swallowed all of the flies and spiders in
the boxes before I could stop him. It was quite evident that he feared, or was jealous
of, some interference. When he had got through his disgusting task, he said cheerfully, Let
the lady come in, and sat down on the edge of his bed with his head down, but with his
eyelids raised so that he could see her as she entered. For a moment I thought he might
have some homicidal intent. I remembered how quiet he had been just before he attacked
me in my own study, and I took care to stand where I could seize him at once, if he attempted
to make a spring at her. She came into the room with an easy gracefulness, which would
at once command the respect of any lunatic, for reasonness is one of the qualities mad
people most respect. She walked over to him smiling pleasantly, and held out her hand.
Good evening, Mr. Renfield, said she. You see, I know you, for Dr. Seaworth has told
me of you. He made no immediate reply, but eyed her all over intently, with a set frown
on his face. This look gave away to one of wonder, which merged in doubt. Then to my
intense astonishment he said, You're not the girl the doctor wanted to marry, are you?
You can't be, you know, for she's dead. Mrs. Harker smiled sweetly as she replied, Oh no,
I have a husband of my own, to whom I was married before I ever saw Dr. Seaworth, or
he me, I and Mrs. Harker. Then what are you doing here? My husband and I are staying on
a visit with Dr. Seaworth. Then don't stay. But why not? I thought that this style of
conversation might not be pleasant to Mrs. Harker any more than it was to me, so I joined
in. How did you know I wanted to marry anyone? His reply was simply contemptuous, given in
a pause in which he turned his eyes from Mrs. Harker to me, instantly turning them back
again. What an asinine question! I don't see that at all, Mr. Renfield, said Mrs. Harker,
at once championing me. He replied to her with as much courtesy and respect as he had
shown contempt to me. You will of course understand, Mrs. Harker, that when a man is so loved and
honoured as our host is, everything regarding him is of interest in our little community.
Dr. Seaworth is loved not only by his household and his friends, but even by his patients,
who, being some of them hardly in mental equilibrium, are apt to distort causes and effects. Since
I myself have been an inmate of a lunatic asylum, I cannot but notice that the sophisticated
tendencies of some of his inmates lean towards the errors of non-causer and ignoratio elench.
I positively opened my eyes at this new development. Here was my own pet lunatic, the most pronounced
of his type that I had ever met with, talking elemental philosophy, and with the manner
of a polished gentleman. I wonder if it was Mrs. Harker's presence which had touched some
memory. If this new phase was spontaneous, or in any way due to her unconscious influence,
she must have some rare gift or power.
We continued to talk for some time, and seeing that he was seemingly quite reasonable, she
ventured, looking at me questioningly as she began to lead him to his favourite topic.
I was again astonished, for he addressed himself to the question with the impartiality of the
completest sanity. He even took himself as an example when he mentioned certain things.
Why I myself am an instance of a man who had a strange belief. Indeed, it was no wonder
that my friends were alarmed and insisted on my being put under control. I used to fancy
that life was a positive and perpetual entity, and that by consuming a multitude of living
things, no matter how low in the scale of creation, one might indefinitely prolong
life. At times I held the belief so strongly that I had actually tried to take a human
life. The doctor here will bear me out that on one occasion I tried to kill him for the
purpose of strengthening my vital powers by the assimilation with my own body of his
life through the medium of his blood, relying of course upon the scriptural phrase, for
the blood is the life. Though indeed the vendor of a certain nostrum has vulgarised the truism
to the very point of contempt. Isn't that true, doctor?
I nodded assent, for I was so amazed that I hardly knew what to either think or say,
it was hard to imagine that I had seen him eat up his spiders and flies not five minutes
before. Looking at my watch, I saw that I should go to the station to meet Van Helsing,
and I told Mrs Harker that it was time to leave. She came at once, after saying pleasantly
to Mr Renfield, good-bye, and I hope that I may see you often under auspices pleasanter
to yourself. To which, to my astonishment, he replied, good-bye, my dear, I pray God I
may never see your sweet face again. May he bless and keep you.
When I went to the station to meet Van Helsing, I left the boys behind me.
Poor Art seemed more cheerful than he has been since Lucy first took ill, and Quincy is more
like his own bright self than he has been for many a long day. Van Helsing stepped from the
carriage with the eager nimbleness of a boy. He saw me at once and rushed up to me, saying,
Ah, friends John, how goes all? Well, so, I have been busy, for I come here to stay if need be.
All affairs are settled with me, and I have much to tell.
Madam Mina is with you? Yes. And her so fine husband? And Arthur and my friend Quincy,
they are with you too? Good. As I drove to the house, I told him of what had passed,
and of how my own diary had come to be of some use through Mrs Harker's suggestion,
at which the Professor interrupted me. Ah, that wonderful Madam Mina! She has a man's brain,
a brain that a man should have were he much gifted, and a woman's heart.
The good God fashioned her for a purpose, believe me, when he made that so good combination.
Friend John, up to now fortune has made that woman of help to us, after tonight she must not
have to do with this so terrible affair. It is not good that she run a risk so great. We men are
determined, nay, are we not pledged to destroy this monster? But it is no part for a woman.
Even if she be not harmed, her heart may fail her in so much and so many horrors,
and hereafter she may suffer, both in walking from her nerves, and in sleep from her dreams.
And besides, she is young woman, and not so long married. There may be other things to think of
some time, if not now. You tell me she has wrote all, then she must consult with us,
but to-morrow we say good-bye to this work, and we go alone. I agreed heartily with him,
and then I told him what we had found in his absence, that the house which Dracula had bought
was the very next one to my own. He was amazed, and a great concern seemed to come on him.
Oh, that we had known it before, he said, for then we might have reached him in time to save
poor Lucy. However, the milk that is spilt cries not out afterwards, as you say. We shall not think
of that, but go on our way to the end. Then he fell into silence that lasted till we entered
my own gateway. Before we went to prepare for dinner, he said to Mrs Harker, I am told,
by my friend John, that you and your husband have put up in exact order all things that have been
up to this moment. Not up to this moment, Professor, she said impulsively, but up to
this morning. But why not up till now? We have seen hitherto how good light all of the little
things have made. We have told our secrets, and yet no one who was told is the worst for it.
Mrs Harker began to blush, and taking a paper from her pocket, she said,
Dr Van Helsing, will you read this and tell me if it must go in? It is my record of today.
I too have seen the need of putting down at present everything, however trivial,
but there is little in this, except what is personal. Must it go in?
The Professor read it over gravely, and handed it back, saying,
It need not go in if you do not wish it, but I pray that it may. It can but make your husband
love you the more, and all us your friends more honour you, as well as more esteem and love.
She took it back with another blush and a bright smile. And so now, up to this very hour,
all the records we have are complete and in order. The Professor took away one copy to study after
dinner, and before our meeting, which is fixed for nine o'clock. The rest of us have already
read everything, so when we meet in the study, we shall all be informed as to facts, and can
arrange our plan of battle with this terrible and mysterious enemy.
Mina Harker's Journal 30th September
When we met in Dr Seawood's study two hours after dinner, which had been at six o'clock,
we unconsciously formed a sort of board or committee. Professor Van Helsing took the
head of the table, to which Dr Seawood motioned him as he came into the room. He made me sit
next to him on his right, and asked me to act as secretary. Jonathan sat next to me. Oppositors
were Lord Godelming, Dr Seawood and Mr Morris, Lord Godelming being next to the Professor,
and Dr Seawood in the centre. The Professor said,
I may, I suppose, take it that we are all acquainted with the facts that are in these papers.
We all expressed assent, and he went on. Then it were, I think, good that I tell you something of
the kind of enemy with which we have to deal. I shall then make known to you something of the
history of this man, which has been ascertained for me, so we can then discuss how we shall act,
and can take our measure according.
There are such beings as vampires. Some of us have evidence that they exist.
Even had we not the proof of our own unhappy experience, the teachings and the records of
the past give proof enough for sane peoples. I admit that at the first I was sceptic. Were it
not that through long years I have trained myself to keep an open mind, I could not have believed
until such time as that fact thunder on my ear. See, see, I prove, I prove. Alas, had I known at
first what now I know, nay, had I even guessed at him, one so precious life had been spared to many
of us who did love her. But that is gone, and we must so work that other poor souls perish not,
whilst we can save. The Nosferatu do not die like the bee when he sting once. He is only stronger,
and being stronger have yet more power to work evil. This vampire which is amongst us of himself
is so strong in person as twenty men. He is of cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the
growth of ages, and have still the aids of necromancy, which is, as his etymology imply,
the divination of the dead, and all the dead that he can come nigh to are for him at command. He is
more than brute, he is devil in callous, and the heart of him is not. He can, within his range,
direct the elements, the storm, the fog, the thunder, he can command all the meaner things,
the rat, and the owl, and the bat, the moth, and the fox, and the wolf, and he can grow and
become small, and he can at times vanish and come unknown. How then are we to begin our strike to
destroy him? How shall we find his where, and having found it, how can we destroy? My friends,
this is much. It is a terrible task that we undertake, and there may be consequence to make
the brave shudder. For if we fail in this, our fight. He must surely win, and then where end we?
Life is nothing's, I heed him not. But to fail here is not mere life or death. It is that we
come as him, that we henceforward become foul things of the night like him, without heart or
conscience, praying on the bodies and the souls of those we love best. To us forever are the gates
of heaven shut, for who shall open them to us again? We go on for all time abhorred by all,
a blot on the face of God's sunshine, an arrow in the side of him who died for man.
But we are face to face with duty, and in such case we must shrink. For me, I say no, but then I am
old, and life, with his sunshine, his fair places, his songs of birds, his music and his love, lie
far behind. You others are young, some have seen sorrow, but there are fair days yet in store.
What say you? Whilst he was speaking, Jonathan had taken my hand. I feared, oh so much, that the
appalling nature of our danger was overcoming him when I saw his hand stretch out. But it was life
to me to feel its touch, so strong, so self-reliant, so resolute. A brave man's hand can speak for
itself. It does not even need a woman's love to hear its music. When the Professor had done
speaking, my husband looked into my eyes, and I in his. There was no need for speaking between us.
I answer for Mina and myself, he said. Count me in, Professor, said Mr Quincy Morris,
laconically as usual. I am with you, said Lord Godelming, for Lucy's sake, if for no other reason.
Dr Seawood simply nodded. The Professor stood up, and, after laying his golden crucifix on the table,
held out his hand on either side. I took his right hand, and Lord Godelming his left.
Jonathan held my right, with his left, and stretched across to Mr Morris.
So as we all took hands, our solemn compact was made. I felt my heart icy cold, but it did not
even occur to me to draw back. We resumed our places, and Dr Van Helsing went on with a sort
of cheerfulness which showed that the serious work had begun. It was to be taken as gravely,
and in as businesslike a way, as any other transaction of life.
Well, you know what we have to contend against, but we too are not without strength.
We have on our side power of combination, a power denied to the vampire kind. We have sources of
science. We are free to act and think, and the hours of the day and the night are ours equally.
In fact, so far as our powers extend, they are unfettered, and we are free to use them.
We have self-devotion in a cause, and an end to achieve, which is not a selfish one. These
things are much. Now, let us see how far the general powers arrayed against us are restrict,
and how the individual cannot. In fine, let us consider the limitations of the vampire in general,
and this one in particular. All we have to go upon are traditions and superstitions.
These do not at the first appear much, when the matter is one of life and death,
nay of more than life and death. Yet must we be satisfied, in the first place because we have to
be, no other means is at our control. And secondly, because after all these things, tradition and
superstition are everything. Does not the belief in vampires rest for others, though not, alas,
for us on them? A year ago, which of us would have received such a possibility in the midst of our
scientific, sceptical, matter-of-fact 19th century? We even scouted a belief that we saw justified
under our very eyes. Take it, then, that the vampire, and the belief in his limitations and
his cure, rest for the moment on some base. For, let me tell you, he is known everywhere
that men have been. In old Greece, in old Rome, he flourished in Germany all over, in France,
in India, even in the Germanies, and in China, so far from us in all ways. There even is he,
and the people's for him at this day. He have followed the wake of the berserker Icelander,
the devil-begotten Hun, the Slav, the Saxon, the Magyar. So far, then, we have all we may act upon,
and let me tell you that very much of the beliefs are justified by what we have seen in our own so
unhappy experience. The vampire live on, and cannot die by mere passing of the time. He can
flourish when that he can fatten on the blood of the living. Even more, we have seen amongst us that
he can grow younger, that his vital faculties grow strenuous, and seem as though they refresh
themselves when his special pabulum is plenty. But he cannot flourish without this diet. He eat
not as others. Even friend Jonathan, who lived with him for weeks, did never see him eat, never.
He throws no shadow, he make in the mirror no reflect, as again Jonathan observe. He has the
strength of many of his hand, witness again Jonathan when he shut the door against the wolves,
and when he help him from the diligence too. He can transform himself to wolf, as we gather from
the ship arrival in Whitby, when he tear open the dog. He can be as a bat, as Madame Mina saw him on
the window at Whitby, and as friend John saw him fly from this so near house, and as my friend
Quincy saw him in the window of Miss Lucy. He can come in mist which he create, that noble ships
kept improved him of this, but from what we know the distance he can make this mist is limited,
and it can only be round himself. He come on moonlight rays as elemental dust, as again
Jonathan saw those sisters in the castle of Dracula. He becomes so small, we ourselves saw
Miss Lucy, as she was at peace, slip through a hair breadth space at the tomb door. He can,
when once he find his way, come out from anything or into anything, no matter how close it be bound,
or even fused up with fire, soldier you call it. He can see in the dark, no small power this,
in a world which is one half shut from the light. Ah, but hear me through, he can do all these things,
yet he is not free. Nay, he is even more prisoner than the slave of the galley, than the madman in
his cell. He cannot go where he lists. He who is not of nature has yet to obey some nature's laws.
Why, we know not. He may not enter anywhere at the first, unless there be some one of the household
who bid him to come, though afterwards he can come as he please. His power ceases, as does that of
all evil things, at the coming of the day. Only at certain times can he have limited freedom.
If he be not at the place whether he is bound, he can only change himself at noon, or exact sunrise,
or sunset. These things we are told, and in this record of ours we have proof by inference. Thus,
whereas he can do as he will within his limit, when he have his earth home, his coffin home,
his hell home, the place unhallowed, as we saw when he went to the grave of the suicide at Whitby,
still at other time he can only change when the time come. It is said, too,
that he can only pass running water at the slack or the flood of the tide. Then there are things
which so afflict him that he has no power, as the garlic that we know of, and as for things sacred,
as this symbol, my crucifix. That was amongst us even now when we resolve. To them he is nothing,
but in their presence he take his place far off and silent with respect. There are others, too,
which I shall tell you of, lest in our seeking we may need them. The branch of wild rose on his
coffin keep him that he may not move from it. A sacred bullet fired into the coffin kill him so
that he be true dead. And as for the stake through him, we know already of its peace,
or the cut-off head that giveth rest. We have seen it with our own eyes. Thus, when we find the
habitation of this man that was, we can confine him to his coffin and destroy him if we obey what
we know. But he is clever. I have asked my friend Arminius of Budapest University to make his record,
and from all the means that are, he tell me of what he has been. He must indeed have been
that Vierveau de Dracula, who won his name against the Turk over the great river on the
very frontier of Turkeyland. If it be so, then was he no common man, for in that time and for
centuries after, he was spoken of as the cleverest and the most cunning, as well as the bravest of
the sons of the land beyond the forest. That mighty brain and that iron resolution went with
him to his grave, and are even now arrayed against us. The Draculas were, says Arminius,
a great and noble race, though now and again were Scions who held by their Kovels to have had
dealings with the evil one. They learned his secrets in the Scholomans, amongst the mountains
over Lake Hermonstadt, where the devil claims the tenth scholar as his due. In the records are such
words as Stragochica, Witch, Ordog, and Pocol, Satan and Hell, and in one manuscript this very
Dracula is spoken of as Vampire, which we all understand too well. There have been from the
loins of this very one great man and good women, and their graves make sacred the earth, where alone
this foulness can dwell. For it is not the least of its terrors that this evil thing is rooted deep
in all good. In soil barren of holy memories it cannot rest. Whilst they were talking,
Mr Morris was looking steadily at the window, and he now got up quietly and went out of the room.
There was a little pause, and then the professor went on. And now we must settle what we do.
We have here much data, and we must proceed to lay out our campaign. We know from the inquiry
of Jonathan that from the castle to Whitby came fifty boxes of earth, all of which were delivered
at Carfax. We also know that at least some of these boxes have been removed. It seems to me
that our first step should be to ascertain whether all the rest remain in the house beyond that wall
where we look today, or whether any more have been removed. If the latter, we must trace.
Here we were interrupted in a very startling way. Outside the house came the sound of a pistol shot.
The glass of the window was shattered with a bullet, which ricocheting from the top of
the room. I am afraid I am at heart a coward, for I shrieked out. The men all jumped to their
feet. Lord Godelming flew over to the window and threw up the sash. As he did so, we heard Mr
Morris' voice without, Sorry, I fear I have alarmed you. I shall come in and tell you about it.
A minute later, he came in and said, It was an idiotic thing of me to do,
and I ask your pardon, Mrs Harker, most sincerely. I fear I must have frightened you terribly.
But the fact is that whilst the Professor was talking, there came a big bat and sat on the
windowsill. I have got such a horror of the damned brutes from recent events that I cannot
stand them, and I went out to have a shot, as I have been doing late of evenings, whenever I
have seen one. You used to laugh at me for it then, Art. Did you hit it? asked Dr Van Helsing.
I don't know. I fancy not, for it flew away into the wood. Without saying any more, he took his
seat, and the Professor began to resume his statement. We must trace each of these boxes,
and when we are ready, we must either capture or kill this monster in his lair, or we must,
so to speak, sterilise the earth, so that no more he can seek safely in it. Thus, in the end,
we may find him in his form of man between the hours of noon and sunset, and so engage with him
when he is at his most weak. And now for you, Madame Mina, this night is end, until all be well.
You are too precious to us to have such risk. When we part tonight, you no more must question.
We are men and are able to bear, but you must be our star and our hope, and we shall act all the
more free that you are not in danger, such as we are. All the men, even Jonathan, seemed relieved,
but it did not seem to me good that they should brave danger and perhaps lessen their safety,
strength being the best safety, through care of me. But their minds were made up,
and though it was a bitter pill for me to swallow, I could say nothing,
save to accept their chivalrous care of me. Mr Morris resumed the discussion.
As there is no time to lose, I vote we have a look at his house right now. Time is everything
with him, and swift action on our part may save another victim. I own that my heart began to fail
me when the time fraction came so close, but I did not say anything, for I had a greater fear
that if I appeared as a drag or a hindrance to their work, they might even leave me out of their
counsels altogether. They have now gone off to Carthax with means to get into the house.
Manlike, they had told me to go to bed and sleep, as if a woman can sleep when those she loves are
in danger. I shall lie down and pretend to sleep, lest Jonathan have added anxiety about me when he
returns. Dr Seward's diary, 1st October 4am. Just as we were about to leave the house,
an urgent message was brought to me from Renfield to know if I would see him at once,
as he had something of the utmost importance to say to me. I told the messenger to say that I
would attend to his wishes in the morning. I was busy just at the moment. The attendant added,
He seems very importunate, sir. I have never seen him so eager. I don't know but what,
if you don't see him soon, he will have one of his violent fits.
I knew the man would not have said this without some cause, so I said,
All right, I'll go now, and I asked the others to wait a few minutes for me,
as I had to go and see my patient.
Take me with you, friends John, said the professor. His case in your diary interests me much,
and it had bearing too now and again on our case. I should much like to see him,
and especially when his mind is disturbed. May I come along also? asked Lord Godalming.
Me too, said Quincy Morris. May I come, said Harker. I nodded, and we all went down the
passage together. We found him in a state of considerable excitement, but far more rational
in his speech and manner than I had ever seen him. There was an unusual understanding of himself,
which was unlike anything I had ever seen in a lunatic, and he took it for granted that his
reasons would prevail, with others entirely sane. We all five went into the room, but none of the
first said anything. His request was that I would at once release him from the asylum
and send him home. This he backed up with arguments regarding his complete recovery,
and deducing his own existing sanity. I appealed to your friends, he said. They will perhaps not
mind sitting in judgment on my case. By the way, you have not introduced me.
I was so much astonished that the oddness of introducing a madman in an asylum did not strike
me at the moment, and besides, there was a certain dignity in the man's manner, so much
of the habit of equality, that I at once made the introduction, Lord Godelming, Professor Van
Helsing, Mr Quincy Morris of Texas, Mr Jonathan Harker, Mr Renfield. He shook hands with each of
them, saying in turn, Lord Godelming, I had the honour of seconding your father at the Wyndham.
I grieve to know, by your holding the title, that he is no more. He was a man loved and honoured
by all who knew him, and in his youth was, I have heard, the inventor of a burnt rum punch,
much patronised on Derby night. Mr Morris, you should be proud of your great state.
Its reception into the Union was a precedent which may have far-reaching effects hereafter,
when the Pole and the Tropic may hold alliance for the Stars and Stripes. The power of treaty may
yet prove a vast engine of enlargement, when the Monroe Doctrine takes its true place in the
fable. What shall any man say of his pleasure at meeting Van Helsing? Sir, I make no apology for
dropping all forms of conventional prefix. When an individual has revolutionised therapeutics by his
discovery of the continuous evolution of brain-matter, conventional forms are unfitting,
since they would seem to limit him to one of a class. You, gentlemen, who by nationality,
by heredity, or by the possession of natural gifts, are fitted to hold your respective places in the
world. I do not need to witness that I am sane, as at least the majority of men are in full
possession of their liberties. And I am sure that you, Dr Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist,
as well as scientist, will deem it a moral duty to deal with me as one to be considered
as under exceptional circumstances. He made this last appeal with a courtly air of conviction,
which was not without its own charm. I think we were all staggered. For my own part,
I was under the conviction, despite my knowledge of the man's character and history,
that his reason had been restored, and I felt under a strong impulse to tell him that I was
satisfied as to his sanity, and would see about the necessary formalities for his release in the
morning. I thought it better to wait, however, before making so grave a statement, for of old
I knew the sudden changes to which this particular patient was liable. So I contented myself with
making a general statement that he appeared to be improving very rapidly, that I would have a longer
chat with him in the morning, and would then see what I could do in the direction of meeting his
wishes. This did not at all satisfy him, for he said quickly, But I fear, Dr Seward, that you
hardly apprehend my wish. I desire to go at once, here, now, this very hour, this very moment, if I
may. Time presses, and in our implied agreement with the old Seidman, it is of the essence of
the contract. I am sure it is only necessary to put before so admirable a practitioner as Dr Seward,
so simple, yet so momentous a wish, to ensure its fulfilment. He looked at me keenly, and seeing the
negative in my face, turned to the others, and scrutinised them closely. Not meeting any
sufficient response, he went on, Is it possible I have erred in my supposition? You have, I said
frankly, but at the same time, as I felt, brutally. There was a considerable pause, and then he said
Then I suppose I must only shift my ground of request. Let me ask for this concession, boon,
privilege, whatever you will. I am content to implore in such a case, not on personal grounds,
but for the sake of others. I am not at liberty to give you the whole of my reasons, but you may,
I assure you, take it from me that they are good ones, unsound and unselfish, and spring from the
highest sense of duty. Could you look, sir, into my heart, you would approve to the full the
animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends.
Again he looked at us all keenly. I had a growing conviction that this sudden change of his entire
intellectual method was but yet another phase of his madness, and so determined to let him go on
a little longer, knowing from experience that he would, like all lunatics, give himself away
in the end. Van Helsing was gazing at him with a look of utmost intensity, his bushy eyebrows
almost meeting with the fixed concentration of his look. He said to Renfield, in a tone which
did not surprise me at the time, but only when I thought of it afterwards, for it was as of one
addressing an equal, Can you not tell, frankly, your real reason for wishing to be free tonight?
I will undertake that if you will satisfy even me, a stranger without prejudice, and with a habit
of keeping an open mind, Dr. Seward will give you, at his own risk and his own responsibility,
the privilege you seek. He shook his head sadly, and with a look of poignant regret on his face,
the professor went on, Come sir, bethink yourself. You claim the privilege of reason in the highest
degree, since you seek to impress us with your complete reasonableness. You do this, whose sanity
we have reason to doubt, since you are not yet released from medical treatment for this very
defect. If you will not help us in our effort to choose the wisest course, how can we perform the
duty which you yourself put upon us? Be wise and help us, and if we can we shall aid you to
achieve your wish. He still shook his head, as he said, Dr. Van Helsing, I have nothing to say.
Your argument is complete, and if I were free to speak, I should not hesitate a moment, but I am
not my own master in the matter. I can only ask you to trust me. If I am refused, the responsibility
does not rest with me. I thought it was now time to end the scene, which was becoming too comically
grave, so I went towards the door, simply saying, Come my friends, we have work to do. Good night.
As, however, I got near the door, a new change came over the patient. He moved towards me so
quickly that for the moment I feared he was about to make another homicidal attack.
My fears, however, were groundless, for he held up his two hands imploringly and made his petition
in a moving manner. As he saw that the very excess of his emotion was mitigating against him,
by storing us more to our old relations, he became still more demonstrative. I glanced at Van Helsing
and saw my conviction reflected in his eyes, so it became a little more fixed in my manner,
if not more stern, and motioned to him that his efforts were unavailing.
I had previously seen something of the same constantly growing excitement in him when he
had to make some request of which at the time he had thought much, such for instance as when he
wanted a cat, and I was prepared to see the collapse into the same sullen acquiescence
on this occasion. My expectation was not realized, for when he found that his appeal would not be
successful, he got into quite a frantic condition. He threw himself onto his knees and held up his
hands, wringing them in plaintive supplication, and poured forth a torrent of entreaty with the
tears rolling down his cheeks and his whole face and form expressive of the deepest emotion.
Let me entreat you, Dr. Seward. Oh, let me implore you to let me out of this house at once.
Send me away, how you will and where you will. Send keepers with me, with whips and chains.
Let them take me in a straight waistcoat, manacled and leg-ind, even to jail. But let me go out of
this. You don't know what you do by keeping me here. I'm speaking from the depths of my heart,
of my very soul. You don't know whom you wrong, or how, and I may not tell. Woe is me, I may not tell.
By all you hold sacred, by all you hold dear, by your love that is lost, by your hope that lives,
for the sake of the Almighty, take me out of this and save my soul from guilt. Can't you hear me,
man? Can't you understand? Will you never learn? Don't you know that I am sane and earnest now,
that I am no lunatic in a mad fit, but a sane man fighting for his soul? Oh, hear me! Hear me!
Let me go! Let me go! Let me go! I thought that the longer this went on, the wilder he would get.
And so would bring on a fit. So I took him by the hand and raised him up.
Come, I said sternly, no more of this. We have had quite enough already.
Get to your bed and try to behave more discreetly. He suddenly stopped and looked at me intently for
several moments. Then, without a word, he rose and, moving over, sat down on the side of the bed.
The collapse had come, as on former occasions, just as I had expected. When I was leaving the
room, last of our party, he said to me, in a quiet, well-bred voice,
You will, I trust, Dr. Seward, do me the justice to bear in mind,
later on, that I did what I could to convince you to night.
Dracula by Bram Stoker
Jonathan Harker's Journal
1st October, 5am
I went with the party to the search with an easy mind, for I think I never saw Mina so absolutely strong and well.
I'm so glad that she consented to hold back and let us men do the work.
Somehow it was a dread to me that she was in this fearful business at all,
but now that her work is done and that it is due to her energy and brains and foresight that the whole story is put together in such a way that every point tells,
she may well feel that her part is finished and she can henceforth leave the rest to us.
We were, I think, all a little upset by the scene with Mr. Renfield.
When we came away from his room we were silent till we got back to the study.
Then Mr. Morrie said to Dr. Seward,
Say Jack, if that man wasn't attempting a bluff he is about the sanest lunatic I ever saw.
I'm not sure, but I believe he had some serious purpose, and if he had it was pretty rough on him not to get a chance.
Lord Godalming and I were silent, but Dr. Van Helsing added,
Friend John, you know more about lunatics than I do, and I'm glad of it,
for I fear that if it had been me to decide I would before that last hysterical outburst have given him free.
But we live and learn, and in our present task we must take no chance, as my friend Quincy would say.
All is best as they are.
Dr. Seward seemed to answer them both in a dreamy kind of way,
I don't know but that I agree with you.
If that man had been an ordinary lunatic I would have taken my chance of trusting him,
but he seemed so mixed up with the Count in an indexy kind of way that I'm afraid of doing anything wrong by helping his fads.
I can't forget how he prayed with almost equal fervour for a cat,
then tried to tear my throat out with his teeth.
Besides, he called the Count Lord and Master, and he may want to get out and help him in some diabolical way.
That horrid thing has the wolves and rats in his own kind to help him,
so I suppose he isn't above trying to use a respectable lunatic.
He certainly did seem earnest though.
I only hope we have done what is best.
These things, in conjunction with the wild work we have in hand, help to unnerve a man.
The Professor stepped over, and laying his hand on his shoulder, said in his grave kindly way,
Friend John, have no fear.
We are trying to do our duty in a very sad and terrible case.
We can only do as we deem best.
What else have we to hope for, except the pity of the good God?
Lord Godolming had slipped away for a few minutes, but now he returned.
He held up a little silver whistle, as he remarked.
That old place may be full of rats, and if so, I've got an antidote on call.
Having passed the wall, we took our way to the house,
taking care to keep in the shadows of the trees on the lawn when the moonlight shone out.
When we got to the porch, the Professor opened his bag,
and took out a lot of things which he laid on the step,
sorting them into four little groups, evidently one for each.
Then he spoke.
My friends, we are going into a terrible danger, and we need arms of many kinds.
Our enemy is not merely spiritual.
Remember that he has the strengths of twenty men,
and that though our necks or our windpipes are of the common kind,
and therefore breakable or crushable, his are not amenable to mere strength.
A stronger man or a body of men, more strong in all than him,
can at certain times hold him, but they cannot hurt him as we can be hurt by him.
We must therefore guard ourselves from his touch.
Keep this near your heart.
As he spoke, he lifted a small silver crucifix,
and held it out to me, I being nearest to him.
Put these flowers round your neck.
Here he handed me a wreath of withered garlic blossoms.
For other enemies more mundane, this revolver and this knife,
and for aiding all these so small electrical lamps which you can fasten to your breast,
and for all and above all at the last, this which we must not desecrate needless.
This was a portion of sacred wafer which he put in an envelope and handed to me.
Each of the others were similarly equipped.
Now, he said, friend John, where are the skeleton keys?
If we can open the door, we need not break into the house by the window as before at Miss Lucy's.
Dr. Seward tried one or two skeleton keys, his mechanical dexterity as a surgeon,
standing him in good stead.
Presently he got one to suit.
After a little play back and forward the bolt yielded, and with a rusty clang shot back.
We pressed on the door, the rusty hinges creaked, and it slowly opened.
It was startling like the image conveyed to me in Dr. Seward's diary of the opening of Miss Westenra's tomb.
I fancied that the same idea appeared to strike the others, for with one accord they shrank back.
The professor was the first to move forward, and he stepped into the open door.
In manus tuas domine, he said, crossing himself as we passed over the threshold.
We closed the door behind us, lest when we should have lit our lamps we should possibly attract attention from the road.
The professor carefully tried the lock, lest we might not be able to open it from within should we be in a hurry making our exit.
Then we all lit our lamps and proceeded on our search.
The light from the tiny lamps fell in all sorts of odd forms as the rays crossed each other,
or the opacity of our bodies through great shadows.
I could not for my life get away from the feeling that there was someone else amongst us.
I suppose it was the recollection so powerfully brought home to me by the grim surroundings of that terrible experience in Transylvania.
I think the feeling was common to us all, for I noticed that the others kept looking over their shoulders at every sound and every new shadow, just as I felt myself doing.
The whole place was thick with dust.
The floor was seemingly inches deep, except where there were recent footsteps,
in which on holding down my lamp I could see marks of hobnails where the dust was cracked.
The walls were fluffy and heavy with dust, and in the corners were masses of spider's webs,
whereon the dust had gathered till they looked like old tattered rags as the weight had torn them partly down.
On a table in the hall was a great bunch of keys with a time-yellowed label on each.
They had been used several times, for on the table were several similar rents in the blanket of dust, similar to that exposed when the professor lifted them.
He turned to me and said, You know this place, Jonathan. You have copied maps of it, and you know it at least more than we do.
Which is the way to the chapel?
I had an idea of its direction, though on my former visit I had not been able to get admission to it,
so I led the way, and after a few wrong turnings found myself opposite a low arched oaken door, ribbed with iron bands.
This is the spot, said the professor as he turned his lamp on a small map of the house,
copied from the file of my original correspondence regarding the purchase.
With a little trouble we found the key on the bunch and opened the door.
We were prepared for some unpleasantness, for as we were opening the door a faint, malodorous air seemed to exhale through the gaps.
But none of us ever expected such an odour as we encountered.
None of the others had met the Count at all at the close quarters, and when I had seen him he was either in the fasting stage of his existence in his rooms,
or when he was bloated with fresh blood in a ruined building open to the air.
But here the place was small and close, and the long disuse had made the air stagnant and foul.
There was an earthy smell as of some dry miasma which came through the foul air.
But as to the odour itself, how shall I describe it?
It was not alone that it was composed of all the ills and mortality, and with the pungent, acrid smell of blood,
but it seemed as though corruption had become itself corrupt.
Ugh, it sickens me to think of it.
Every breath exhaled by that monster seemed to have clung to the place and intensified its loathsomeness.
Under ordinary circumstances, such a stench would have brought our enterprise to an end.
But this was no ordinary case, and the high and terrible purpose in which we were involved
gave us a strength which rose above merely physical considerations.
After the involuntary shrinking consequent on the first nauseous whiff,
we one and all set about our work as though that loathsome place were a garden of roses.
We made an accurate examination of the place, the professor saying as we began,
the first thing is to see how many of the boxes are left.
We must then examine every hole and corner and cranny,
and see if we cannot get some clue as to what has become of the rest.
A glance was sufficient to show how many remained,
for the great earth chests were bulky and there was no mistaking them.
There were only 29 left out of the 50.
Once I got a fright, for seeing Lord Godalning suddenly turn and look out of the vaulted door
into the dark passage beyond, I looked too, and for an instant my heart stood still.
Somewhere, looking out from the shadow, I seemed to see the highlights of the Count's evil face,
the ridge of the nose, the red eyes, the red lips, the awful pallor.
It was only for a moment, for as Lord Godalning said,
I thought I saw a face, but it was only the shadows,
and resumed his inquiry, I turned my lamp in the direction and stepped into the passage.
There was no sign of anyone, and as there were no corners, no doors,
no aperture of any kind but only the solid walls of the passage,
there could be no hiding place even for him.
I took it that fear had helped imagination and said nothing.
A few moments later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner which he was examining.
We all followed his movements with our eyes, for undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us,
and we saw a whole mass of phosphorescence which twinkled like stars.
We all instinctively drew back. The whole place was becoming alive with rats.
For a moment or two we stood appalled, all save Lord Godalning,
who was seemingly prepared for such an emergency.
Rushing over to the great iron-bound oaken door which Dr. Seward had described from the outside,
and which I had seen myself, he turned the key in the lock,
drew the huge bolts and swung the door open.
Then, taking his little silver whistle from his pocket, he blew a low shrill call.
It was answered from behind Dr. Seward's house by the yelping of dogs,
and after about a minute three terriers came dashing round the corner of the house.
Unconsciously we had all moved towards the door,
and as we moved I noticed that the dust had been much disturbed.
The boxes which had been taken out had been brought this way.
But even in the minute that had elapsed the number of the rats had vastly increased.
They seemed to swarm over the place all at once,
till the lamplight shining on their moving dark bodies and glittering baleful eyes
made the place look like a bank of earth set with fireflies.
The dogs dashed on but at the threshold suddenly stopped and snarled,
and then, simultaneously lifting their noses, began to howl in most lugubrious fashion.
The rats were multiplying in thousands, and we moved out.
Lord Godalming lifted one of the dogs and, carrying him in, placed him on the floor.
The instant his feet touched the ground he seemed to recover his courage and rushed at his natural enemies.
They fled before him so fast that before he had shaken the life out of a score,
the other dogs, who had by now been lifted in the same manner,
had but small prey ere the whole mass had vanished.
With their going it seemed as if some evil presence had departed,
for the dogs frisked about and barked merrily as they made sudden darts at their prostrate foes,
and turned them over and over and tossed them in the air with vicious shakes.
We all seemed to find our spirits rise.
Whether it was the purifying of the deadly atmosphere by the opening of the chapel door,
or the relief we experienced by finding ourselves in the open, I know not,
but most certainly the shadow of dread seemed to slip from us like a robe,
and the occasion of our coming lost something of its grim significance,
though we did not slacken the wit in our resolution.
We closed the outer door and barred and locked it,
and bringing the dogs with us began our search of the house.
We found nothing throughout except dust in extraordinary proportions,
and all untouched save for my own footsteps when I had made my first visit.
Never once did the dogs exhibit any symptom of uneasiness,
and even when we returned to the chapel they frisked about
as though they had been rabbit hunting in a summer wood.
The morning was quickening in the east when we emerged from the front.
Dr Van Helsing had taken the key of the hall door from the bunch
and locked the door in orthodox fashion, putting the key into his pocket when he had done.
So far, he said, our night has been eminently successful.
No harm has come to us such as I feared might be,
and yet we have ascertained how many boxes are missing.
More than all do I rejoice that this, our first and perhaps our most difficult
and dangerous step has been accomplished,
without bringing there into our most sweet madame Mina,
or troubling her waking or sleeping thoughts with sights and sounds
and smells of horror which she might never forget.
One lesson, too, we have learned, if it be allowable to argue a particularity,
that the brute beasts which are at the Count's command
are yet themselves not amenable to his spiritual power,
for look, these rats that would come to his call just as from his castle top
he summoned the wolves to your going and to that poor mother's cry,
though they come to him, they run pell-mell from the so little dogs my friend Arthur.
We have other matters before us, other dangers, other fears, and that monster.
He has not used his power over the brute world for the only or the last time tonight,
so be it that he has gone elsewhere.
Good, it has given us opportunity to cry check in some ways in this check game
which we play for the sake of human souls.
Now let us go home, the dawn is close at hand
and we have reason to be content with our first night's work.
It may be ordained that we have many nights and days to follow, if full of peril,
but we must go on and from no danger shall we shrink.
The house was silent when we got back,
save for some poor creature who was screaming away in one of the distant wards
and a low moaning sound from Renfield's room.
The poor wretch was doubtless torturing himself after the manner of the insane
with needless thoughts of pain.
I came tiptoe into our own room and found Mina asleep,
breathing so softly that I had to put my ear down to hear it.
She looks paler than usual.
I hope the meeting tonight has not upset her.
I am truly thankful that she is to be left out of our future work
and even of our deliberations.
It is too great a strain for a woman to bear.
I did not think so at first but I know better now.
Therefore I am glad that it is settled.
There may be things which would frighten her to hear
and yet to conceal them from her might be worse than to tell her
if once she suspected that there was any concealment.
Henceforth our work is to be a sealed book to her
till at least such time as we can tell her that all is finished
and the earth free from a monster of the netherworld.
I dare say it would be difficult to begin to keep silence after such confidence as ours
but I must be resolute and tomorrow I shall keep dark over tonight's doings
and shall refuse to speak of anything that has happened.
I rest on the sofa so as not to disturb her.
First of October, later.
I suppose it was natural that we should all have overslept ourselves
for the day was a busy one and the night had no rest at all.
Even Mina must have felt his exhaustion
for though I slept till the sun was high I was awake before her
and had to call two or three times before she awoke.
Indeed she was so sound asleep that for a few seconds she did not recognise me
but looked at me with a sort of blank terror
as one looks who has been waked out of a bad dream.
She complained a little of being tired and I let her rest till later in the day.
We now know of 21 boxes having been removed
and if it be that several were taken in any of these removals
we may be able to trace them all.
Such will of course immensely simplify our labour
and the sooner the matter is attended to the better.
I shall look up Thomas Snelling today.
Dr. Seward's diary
1st of October. It was towards noon
when I was awakened by the professor walking into my room.
He was more jolly and cheerful than usual
and it is quite evident that last night's work
has helped take some of the brooding weight off his mind.
After going over the adventure of the night he suddenly said
your patient interests me much.
May it be that with you I visit him this morning
or if that you are too occupied I can go alone if it may be.
It is a new experience to me to find a lunatic
who talks philosophy and reason so sound.
I had some work to do which pressed
so I told him that if he would go alone I would be glad
as then I should not have to keep him waiting.
So I called an attendant and gave him the necessary instructions.
Before the professor left the room
I cautioned him against getting any false impression from my patient.
But, he answered, I want to talk to him of himself
and of his delusion as to consuming live things.
He said to Madame Mina as I see in your diary of yesterday
that he had once had such a belief.
Why do you smile, friend John?
Excuse me, I said, but the answer is here.
I laid my hand on the tight written matter.
When Arsene and Learned Lunatic made that very statement
of how he used to consume life
his mouth was actually nauseous with the flies and spiders
which he had eaten just before Mrs Harker entered the room.
Van Helsing smiled in turn.
Good, he said, your memory is true, friend John.
I should have remembered.
And yet it is this very obliquity of thought and memory
which makes mental disease such a fascinating study.
Perhaps I may gain more knowledge out of the folly of this madman
than I shall from teaching of the most wise.
Who knows?
I went on with my work and before long was through that in hand.
It seemed that the time had been very short indeed.
But there was Van Helsing back in the study.
Do I interrupt? he asked politely as he stood at the door.
Not at all, I answered. Come in.
My work is finished and I am free.
I can go with you now if you like.
It is needless. I have seen him.
Well?
I fear that he does not appraise me at much.
Our interview was short.
When I entered his room he was sitting on a stool in the centre
with his elbows on his knees
and his face was the picture of sullen discontent.
I spoke to him as cheerfully as I could
and with such a measure of respect as I could assume.
He made no reply whatever.
Don't you know me? I asked.
His answer was not reassuring.
I know you well enough.
You are the old fool Van Helsing.
I wish you would take yourself
and your idiotic brain theories somewhere else.
Damn all thick-headed Dutchman!
Not a word more would he say
but sat in his implacable sullenness
as indifferent to me as though I had not been in the room at all.
Thus departed for this time
my chance of much learning from this so clever lunatic.
So I shall go, if I may,
and cheer myself with a few happy words
with that sweet soul, Madame Mina.
Friend John, it does rejoice me unspeakably
that she is no more to be pained
no more to be worried with our terrible things.
Though we shall much miss her help
it is better so.
I agree with you
with all my heart, I answered earnestly
for I did not want him to weaken in this matter.
Mrs Harker is better out of it.
Things are quite bad enough for us
all men of the world
and who have been in many tight places in our time
but it is no place for a woman
and if she had remained in touch with the affair
it would in time infallibly have wrecked her.
So Van Helsing has gone to confer with Mrs Harker
and Harker.
Quincy and Art are all out following up the clues
as to the earth boxes.
I shall finish my round of work
and we shall meet tonight.
Mina Harker's journal
1st of October
It is strange to me
to be kept in the dark as I am today
after Jonathan's full confidence
for so many years
to see him manifestly avoid certain matters
and those are the most vital of all.
This morning I slept late
after the fatigues of yesterday
and though Jonathan was late too he was the earlier.
He spoke to me before he went out
never more sweetly or tenderly
but he never mentioned a word
of what had happened in the visit to the Count's house
and yet he must have known
how terribly anxious I was.
Poor dear fellow!
I suppose it must have distressed him
even more than it did me.
They all agreed that it was best
that I should not be drawn further into this awful work
and I acquiesced
but to think that he keeps anything from me
and now I am crying like a silly fool
when I know it comes from my husband's great love
and from the good, good wishes of those other strong men.
That has done me good.
Well, some day Jonathan will tell me all
and lest it should ever be
that he should think for a moment
that I kept anything from him
I still keep my journal as usual.
Then, if he is feared of my trust
I shall show it to him with every thought of my heart
put down for his dear eyes to read.
I feel strangely sad
and low-spirited today.
I suppose it is the reaction from the terrible excitement.
Last night I went to bed
when the men had gone
simply because they told me to.
I didn't feel sleepy
and I did feel full of devouring anxiety.
I kept thinking over everything that has been
ever since Jonathan came to see me in London
and it all seems like a horrible tragedy
with fate pressing on relentlessly to some destined end.
Everything that one does seems, no matter how right it may be
to bring on the very thing which is most to be deplored.
If I hadn't gone to Whitby perhaps
poor dear Lucy would be with us now.
She hadn't taken to visiting the church out till I came
and if she hadn't come there in the daytime with me
she wouldn't have walked in her sleep
and if she hadn't gone there at night and asleep
that monster wouldn't have destroyed her as he did.
Oh, why did I ever go to Whitby?
There now, crying again.
I wonder what has come over me today.
I must hide it from Jonathan
for if he knew that I had been crying twice in one morning
I, who never cried on my own account
and whom he has never caused to shed a tear
the dear fellow would fret his heart out.
I shall put a bold face on
and if I do feel weepy
he shall never see it.
I suppose it is just one of the lessons
that we poor women have to learn.
I can't quite remember how I fell asleep last night.
I remember hearing the sudden
barking of the dogs and a lot of queer sounds
like praying on a very tumultuous
scale from Mr. Renfield's room
which is somewhere under this.
And then there was silence over everything
silence so profound
that it startled me and I got up
and looked out of the window.
All was dark and silent
the black shadows thrown by the moonlight
seeming full of a silent mystery of their own.
Not a thing seemed to be stirring
but all to be grim
and fixed as death or fate
so that a thin streak of white mist
that crept with almost imperceptible slowness
across the grass towards the house
seemed to have a sentience and a vitality
of its own.
I think that the digression of my thoughts
must have done me good, for when I got back to bed
I found a lethargy creeping over me.
I lay a while but could not quite sleep
so I got out and looked out
of the window again.
The mist was spreading and was now close up to the house
so that I could see it lying thick
against the wall as though it was
stealing up to the windows.
The poor man was more loud than ever
and though I could not distinguish a word he said
I could in some way recognize in his
tones some passionate entreaty on
his part.
Then there was the sound of a struggle
and I knew that the attendants were dealing with him.
I was so frightened
that I crept into bed and pulled the clothes
over my head putting my fingers in my ears.
I was not then a bit sleepy
at least so I thought
but I must have fallen asleep
for except dreams I do not remember anything
until the morning when Jonathan woke me.
I think that it took me an effort
and a little time to realize where I was
and that it was Jonathan who was bending over me.
My dream
was very peculiar and was almost typical
of the way that waking thoughts become merged
in or continued in dreams.
I thought that
I was asleep and waiting for Jonathan to come
back. I was very anxious
about him and I was powerless to act.
My feet and my hands and my brain were
weighted so that nothing could proceed
at the usual pace
and so I slept uneasily and thought.
Then it began to dawn upon
me that the air was heavy and dank and
cold. I put back the clothes
from my face and found to my surprise that all
was dim around. The gaslight
which I had left lit for Jonathan
but turned down came only
like a tiny red spark through the
fog which had evidently grown thicker
and poured into the room.
Then it occurred to me that I had shut the
window before I had come to bed.
I would have got out to make certain on the point
but some leaden lethargy seemed to chain
my limbs and even my will.
I lay still and endured.
That was all. I closed
my eyes but could still see through my eyelids.
It is wonderful what tricks our dreams
players and how conveniently we can imagine.
The mist
grew thicker and thicker and I could see
now how it came in for I could see it
like smoke or with the white energy
of boiling water pouring in
not through the window but through the joinings
of the door. It got thicker
and thicker till it seemed as if it became
concentrated into a sort of pillar
of cloud in the room through the top
of which I could see the light of the gas
shining like a red eye.
Things began to whirl through my brain
just as the cloudy column was now whirling
in the room and through it all
came the scriptural words
a pillar of cloud by day and of fire
by night.
Was it indeed such spiritual guidance
that was coming to me in my sleep?
But the pillar was composed of both
the day and the night guiding for the fire
was in the red eye which at the thought
got a new fascination for me till as I looked
the fire divided and seemed
to shine on me through the fog like two red eyes
such as Lucy told me of in her momentary
mental wandering when on the cliff
the dying sunlight struck the windows
of St Mary's Church.
Suddenly the horror burst upon
me that it was thus that Jonathan
had seen those awful women
growing into reality through the whirling
mist in the moonlight and in my
dream I must have fainted for all became
black darkness.
The last conscious effort which my imagination
made was to show me a
livid white face bending over me
out of the mist.
I must be careful of such dreams
for they would unseat one's reason if there
were too much of them.
I would get Dr. Van Helsing
or Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me
which would make me sleep only that
I fear to alarm them.
Such a dream at the present time would become
woven into their fears for me.
Tonight I shall strive hard to sleep
naturally. If I do not
I shall tomorrow night get them to give me a dose
of chloral that cannot hurt me for once
and it will give me a good night's sleep.
Last night tired me
more than if I had not slept at all.
Second of October, 10pm
Last night
I slept but did not dream.
I must have slept soundly for
I was not waked by Jonathan coming to bed
but the sleep has not refreshed me
for today I feel terribly weak
and spiritless.
I spent all yesterday trying to read
or lying down dozing.
In the afternoon Mr. Renfield
asked if he might see me.
Poor man he was very gentle
and when I came away he kissed my hand
and bade God bless me.
Some way it affected me much.
I am crying when I think of him.
This is a new weakness
of which I must be careful.
Jonathan would be miserable if he knew I had been crying.
He and the others
were out till dinner time
and they all came in tired.
I did what I could to brighten them up
and I suppose that the effort did me good
for I forgot how tired I was.
After dinner they sent me to bed
and all went off to smoke together as they said
but I knew that they wanted to tell each other
of what had occurred to each other during the day.
I could see from Jonathan's manner
that he had something important to communicate.
I was not so sleepy
as I should have been
so before they went I asked Dr. Stewart
to give me a little opiate of some kind
as I had not slept well the night before.
He very kindly made up a sleeping draft
which he gave to me
telling me that it would do me no harm
as it was very mild.
I have taken it
and am waiting for sleep
which still keeps aloof.
I hope I have not done wrong
for as sleep begins to flirt with me
a new fear comes
that I may have been foolish in thus depriving myself
of the power of waking.
I might want it.
Here comes sleep.
Good night.
Read in Nottingham, England
on the 28th January 2006
by Alex Foster
www.alexfoster.me.uk
Jonathan Harker's Journal
1st October, Evening
I found Thomas Snelling in his house at Bethnal Green,
but unhappily he was not in a condition to remember anything.
The very prospect of beer which my expected coming had opened to him,
had proved too much, and he had begun too early on his expected debauch.
I learned, however, from his wife, who seemed a decent poor soul,
that he was only the assistant of Smollett,
who of the two mates was the responsible person.
So off I drove to Walworth, and found Mr. Joseph Smollett at home,
and in his shirt sleeves, taking a late tea out of a saucer.
He is a decent, intelligent fellow, distinctly a good, reliable type of workman,
and with a headpiece of his own.
He remembered all about the incident of the boxes,
and from a wonderful dog-eared notebook,
which he produced from some mysterious receptacle about the seat of his trousers,
and which had hieroglyphical entries in thick half-obliterated pencil,
he gave me the destinations of the boxes.
There were, he said, six in the card-load which he took from Carfax,
and left at 197 Chickson Street, Mile End, New Town,
and another six which he deposited at Jamaica Lane, Bermondsey.
If, then, the Count meant to scatter these ghastly refuges of his over London,
these places were chosen as the first of delivery,
so that later he might distribute more fully.
The systematic manner in which this was done made me think that he could not mean
to confine himself to two sides of London.
He was now fixed on the Far East on the Northern Shore,
on the East of the Southern Shore, and on the South.
The North and West were surely never meant to be left out of his diabolical scheme,
let alone the city itself, and the very heart of fashionable London in the South West and West.
I went back to Smollett, and asked him if he could tell us
if any other boxes had been taken from Carfax.
He replied,
Well, Governor, you've treated me very handsome.
I had given him half a sovereign.
And I'll tell you all I know.
I heard a man by the name of Bloxham say four nights ago in the Aire and Ounce,
in Pinchard Alley, as how he and his mate had had a rare dusty job in an old house at Perfleet.
There ain't many such jobs as this here,
and I'm thinking that maybe Sam Bloxham could tell you summat.
I asked if he could tell me where to find him.
I told him that if he could get me the address it would be worth another half sovereign to him.
So he gulped down the rest of his tea and stood up,
saying that he was going to begin the search then and there.
At the door he stopped and said,
Look here, Governor, there ain't no cent in mere keeping you here.
I may find Sam soon, or I mayn't.
But anyhow, he ain't like to be in a way to tell you much to-night.
Sam is a rare one when he starts on the booze.
If you can give me an envelope with a stamp on it, and put your address on it,
I'll find out where Sam is to be found and post at you to-night.
But you'd better be up after him soon in the morning, ever mind the booze the night afore.
This was all practical.
So one of the children went off with a penny to buy an envelope and a sheet of paper,
and to keep the change.
When she came back I addressed the envelope and stamped it,
and when Smollett had again faithfully promised to post the address when found,
I took my way to home.
We're on the track anyhow.
I am tired to-night, and I want to sleep.
Mina is fast asleep, and looks a little too pale.
Her eyes look as though she had been crying.
Poor dear, I've no doubt it frets her to be kept in the dark.
And it may make her doubly anxious about me and the others.
But it is best as it is.
It is better to be disappointed and worried in such a way now than to have her nerve broken.
The doctors were quite right to insist on her being kept out of this dreadful business.
I must be firm, for on me this particular burden of silence must rest.
I shall not ever enter on the subject with her under any circumstances.
Indeed, it may not be a hard task, after all, for she herself has become reticent on the subject,
and has not spoken of the Count or his doings ever since we told her of our decision.
Second October. Evening. A long and trying and exciting day.
By the first post I got my directed envelope with a dirty scrap of paper enclosed,
on which was written with a carpenter's pencil in a sprawling hand,
Sam Bloxham, Corcoran's, 4 Poters Court, Bartle Street, Walworth. Ask for the dip height.
I got the letter in bed and rose without waking Mina.
She looked heavy and sleepy and pale and far from well.
I determined not to wake her, but that when I should return from this new search
I would arrange for her going back to Exeter.
I think she would be happier in our own home with her daily tasks to interest her,
than in being here amongst us and in ignorance.
I only saw Dr Seward for a moment and told him where I was off to,
promising to come back and tell the rest so soon as I should have found out anything.
I drove to Walworth and found, with some difficulty, Potter's Court.
Mr Smollett's spelling misled me, as I asked for Poters Court instead of Potter's Court.
However, when I had found the court I had no difficulty in discovering Corcoran's lodging
house. When I asked the man who came to the door for the dip height, he shook his head and said,
I don't know him. There ain't no such person here. I never heard of him in all my blooming days.
Don't believe there ain't nobody of that kind living here or anywheres.
I took out Smollett's letter, and as I read it, it seemed to me that the lesson of the spelling of
the name of the court might guide me. What are you? I asked.
I'm the deputy, he answered. I saw at once that I was on the right track.
Phonetic spelling had again misled me. A half-crowned tip put the deputy's knowledge at my
disposal, and I learned that Mr Bloxham, who had slept off the remains of his beer on the previous
night at Corcoran's, had left for his work at Poplar at five o'clock that morning. He could not
tell me where the place of work was situated, but he had a vague idea that it was some kind of a
newfangled warress, and with this slender clue I had to start for Poplar. It was twelve o'clock
before I got any satisfactory hint of such a building, and this I got at a coffee shop,
where some workmen were having their dinner. One of them suggested that there was being erected
cross Angel Street a new cold storage building, and as this suited the condition of a newfangled
warress, I at once drove to it. An interview with a surly gatekeeper and a surlier foreman,
both of whom were appeased with the coin of the realm, put me on the track of Bloxham.
He was sent for on my suggestion that I was willing to pay his day's wages to his foreman
for the privilege of asking him a few questions on a private matter.
He was a smart enough fellow, though rough of speech and bearing. When I had promised to pay
for his information and given him an earnest, he told me that he had made two journeys between
Carfax and a house in Piccadilly, and had taken from this house to the latter nine great boxes,
main heavy ones, with a horse and cart hired by him for this purpose.
I asked him if he could tell me the number of the house in Piccadilly, to which he replied,
Well, Governor, I forgets the number, but it was only a few door from a big white church,
or something of the kind, not long built. It was a dusty old house, too, though nothing to the
dustiness of the house we took the blooming boxes from. How did you get in if both houses were empty?
There was the old party that engaged me awaiting at the house at Purfleet. He helped me to lift the
boxes and put them in the dray, cursed me, but he was the strongest chap I ever struck, and him an
old fellow with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn't throw a shadow.
How this phrase thrilled through me! Why, he took up his end of the boxes like they was pounds of
tea, and me a puffin' and a blowin' afore I could upend mine anyhow, and I'm no chicken neither.
How did you get into the house in Piccadilly? I asked.
He was there, too. He must have started off and got there afore me, for when I rung the bell
he came and opened the door himself, and helped me carry the boxes into the hall.
The whole nine? I asked.
Yes, there was five in the first load and four in the second.
It was main dry work, and I don't so well remember how I got home.
I interrupted him. Were the boxes left in the hall?
Yes, it was a big hall, and there was nothing else in it.
I made one more attempt to further matters. You didn't have any key?
Never used no key nor nothing. The old gent, he opened the door himself,
and shut it again when I drove off. I don't remember the last time, but that was the beer.
And you can't remember the number of the house?
No, sir. But you needn't have no difficulty about that.
It's iron with a stone front with a bow on it, and I steps up to the door.
I know them steps, having had to carry the boxes up with three loafers that come round
to earn a copper. The old gent gave them shillings, and they seeing they got so much,
they wanted more. But he took one of them by the shoulder and was like to throw him
down the steps till the lot of them went away cussing.
I thought that with this description I could find the house.
So having paid my friend for his information, I started off for Piccadilly.
I had gained a new painful experience. The Count could, it was evident,
handle the earth boxes himself. If so, time was precious. For now that he had achieved
a certain amount of distribution, he could, by choosing his own time, complete the task unobserved.
At Piccadilly Circus I discharged my cab and walked westward.
Beyond the junior constitutional, I came across the house described and was satisfied that this
was the next of the layers arranged by Dracula. The house looked as though it had been long
untenanted. The windows were encrusted with dust and the shutters were up. All the framework was
black with time, and from the iron the paint had mostly scaled away. It was evident that up to
lately there had been a large notice board in front of the balcony. It had, however, been roughly
torn away, the uprights which had supported it still remaining.
Behind the rails of the balcony, I saw there were some loose boards whose raw edges looked
white. I would have given a good deal to have been able to see the notice board intact,
as it would, perhaps, have given some clue to the ownership of the house.
I remembered my experience of the investigation and purchase of Carfax,
and I could not but feel that if I could find the former owner there might be some means
discovered of gaining access to the house. There was at present nothing to be learned
from the Piccadilly side, and nothing could be done, so I went around the back to see if
anything could be gathered from this quarter. The mews were active, the Piccadilly houses being
mostly in occupation. I asked one or two of the grooms and helpers whom I saw around if
they could tell me anything about the empty house. One of them said that he heard it had
lately been taken, but he couldn't say from whom. He told me, however, that up to very
lately there had been a notice board of For Sale up, and that perhaps Mitchell, Sons and Candy,
the house agents, could tell me something, as he thought he remembered seeing the name of that firm
on the board. I did not wish to seem too eager or to let my informant know or guess too much,
so thanking him in the usual manner I strolled away.
It was now growing dusk, and the autumn night was closing in, so I did not lose any time.
Having learned the address of Mitchell, Sons and Candy from a directory at the Barclay,
I was soon at their office in Sackville Street. The gentleman who saw me was particularly suave
in manner, but uncommunicative in equal proportion. Having once told me that the Piccadilly house,
which throughout our interview he called a mansion, was sold, he considered my business
as concluded. When I asked who had purchased it, he opened his eyes a thought wider,
and paused a few seconds before replying,
It is sold, sir.
Pardon me, I said, with equal politeness, but I have a special reason for wishing to know who
purchased it. Again he paused longer and raised his eyebrows still more.
It is sold, sir, was again his laconic reply.
Surely, I said, you do not mind letting me know so much.
But I do mind, he answered, the affairs of their clients are absolutely safe in the
hands of Mitchell, Sons and Candy. This was manifestly a prig of the first water,
and there was no use arguing with him. I thought I had best meet him on his own ground,
so I said, Your clients, sir, are happy in having so resolute a guardian of their confidence.
I am myself a professional man. Here I handed him my card. In this instance I am not prompted
by curiosity. I act on the part of Lord Godelming, who wishes to know something of the property which
was, he understood, lately for sale. These words put a different complexion on affairs.
He said, I would like to oblige you if I could, Mr. Harker, and especially would I like to oblige
his lordship. We once carried out a small matter of renting some chambers for him when he was the
Honorable Arthur Homewood. If you will let me have his lordship's address, I will consult the
house on the subject, and will, in any case, communicate with his lordship by tonight's post.
It will be a pleasure if we can so far deviate from our rules as to give the required information
to his lordship. I wanted to secure a friend and not make an enemy, so I thanked him,
gave the address at Dr. Seward's, and came away. It was now dark, and I was tired and hungry.
I got a cup of tea at the aerated bread company, and came down to Purfleet by the next train.
I found all the others at home. Mina was looking tired and pale,
but she made a gallant effort to be bright and cheerful. It rung my heart to think that I had
had to keep anything from her, and so caused her inquietude. Thank God this will be the last night
of her looking on at our conferences, and feeling the sting of our not showing our confidence.
It took all my courage to hold to the wise resolution of keeping her out of our grim task.
She seems somehow more reconciled, or else the very subject seems to have become repugnant to her,
for when any accidental illusion is made, she actually shudders.
I am glad we made our resolution in time, as with such a feeling as this,
our growing knowledge would be torture to her.
I could not tell the others of the day's discovery till we were alone,
so after dinner, followed by a little music to save appearances even amongst ourselves,
I took Mina to her room and left her to go to bed.
The dear girl was more affectionate with me than ever, and clung to me as though she would detain
me. But there was much to be talked of, and I came away. Thank God the ceasing of telling
things has made no difference between us. When I came down again, I found the others
gathered round the fire in the study. In the train I had written my diary so far,
and simply read it off to them as the best means of letting them get a breast of my own information.
When I had finished, Van Helsing said,
This has been a great day's work, friend Jonathan. Doubtless we are on the track
of the missing boxes. If we find them all in that house, then our work is near the end.
But if there be some missing, we must search until we find them,
then surely make our final coup, and hunt the wretch to his real death.
We all sat silent a while, and all at once Mr Norrish spoke.
Say, how are we going to get into that house?
We got into the other, answered Lord Godelman quickly.
But Art, this is different. We broke house at Carfax, but we had night and a walled park
to protect us. It will be a mighty different thing to commit burglary in Piccadilly,
either by day or night. I confess I don't see how we are going to get in,
unless that agency duck can find us a key of some sort.
Lord Godelman's brows contracted, and he stood up and walked about the room.
By and by he stopped and said, turning from one to another of us,
Quincy's head is level, this burglary business is getting serious.
We got off once all right, but we have now a rare job on hand,
unless we can find the Count's key basket.
As nothing could well be done before morning, and as it would be at least advisable to wait
till Lord Godelman should hear from Mitchell's, we decided not to take any active step before
breakfast time. For a good while we sat and smoked, discussing the matter in its various
lights and bearings. I took the opportunity of bringing this diary right up to the moment.
I am very sleepy and shall go to bed. Just a line. Mina sleeps soundly and her breathing is
regular. Her forehead is puckered up into little wrinkles, as though she thinks even in her sleep.
She is still too pale, but does not look so haggard as she did this morning. Tomorrow will,
I hope, mend all this. She will be herself at home in Exeter. Oh, but I am sleepy.
Dr. Seward's Diary. 1st October. I am puzzled afresh about Renfield. His moods change so rapidly
that I find it difficult to keep touch of them. And as they always mean something more than his
own well-being, they form a more than interesting study. This morning, when I went to see him after
his repulse of Van Helsing, his manner was that of a man commanding destiny. He was, in fact,
commanding destiny, subjectively. He did not really care for any of the things of mere earth.
He was in the clouds and looked down on all the weaknesses and wants of us poor mortals.
I thought I would improve the occasion and learn something, so I asked him,
what about the flies these times? He smiled on me in quite a superior sort of way, such a smile as
would have become the face of Malvolio, as he answered me. The fly, my dear sir, has one striking
feature. Its wings are typical of the aerial powers of the psychic faculties. The ancients did well
when they typified the soul as a butterfly. I thought I would push his analogy to its utmost
logically. So I said quickly, oh, it is a soul you are after now, is it? His madness foiled his reason
and a puzzled look spread over his face as, shaking his head with a decision which I had
but seldom seen in him, he said, oh, no, oh, no, I want no souls. Life is all I want. Here he
brightened up. I am pretty indifferent about it at present. Life is all right. I have all I want.
You must get a new patient, doctor, if you wish to study zoophagy. This puzzled me a little,
so I drew him on. Then you command life. You are a god, I suppose. He smiled with an ineffably benign
superiority. Oh, no, far be it from me to arrogate to myself the attributes of the deity.
I am not even concerned in his especially spiritual doings. If I may state my intellectual
position, I am, so far as concerns things purely terrestrial, somewhat in the position which Enoch
occupied spiritually. This was a poser to me. I could not at the moment recall Enoch's
appositeness, so I had to ask a simple question, though I felt that by so doing I was lowering
myself in the eyes of the lunatic. And why with Enoch? Because he walked with God.
I could not see the analogy, but did not like to admit it, so I harked back to what he had denied.
So you don't care about life, and you don't want souls. Why not? I put my question quickly
and somewhat sternly, on purpose to disconcert him. The effort succeeded. For an instant he
unconsciously relapsed into his old servile manner, bent low before me, and actually
fawned upon me as he replied, I don't want any souls, indeed, indeed, I don't. I couldn't use
them if I had them. They would be no manner of use to me. I couldn't eat them, or... He suddenly
stopped, and the old cunning look spread over his face, like a wind sweep on the surface of the water.
And, Doctor, as to life, what is it, after all, when you've got all you require?
And you know that you will never want, that is all. I have friends, good friends, like you,
Doctor Seward. This was said with a leer of inexpressible cunning.
I know that I shall never lack the means of life. I think that through the cloudiness of his insanity
he saw some antagonism in me, for he at once fell back on the last refuge of such as he,
a dogged silence. After a short time I saw that for the present it was useless to speak to him.
He was sulky, and so I came away. Later in the day he sent for me. Ordinarily I would not have
come without special reason, but just at present I am so interested in him that I would gladly make
an effort. Besides, I am glad to have anything to help pass the time. Harker is out, following up
clues, and so are Lord Godelming and Quincy. Van Helsing sits in my study, pouring over the record
prepared by the Harkers. He seems to think that by accurate knowledge of all details he will light
upon some clue. He does not wish to be disturbed in the work without cause. I would have taken him
with me to see the patient. Only I thought that after his last repulse he might not care to go
again. There was also another reason. Renfield might not speak so freely before a third person
as when he and I were alone. I found him sitting in the middle of the floor on his stool,
a pose which is generally indicative of some mental energy on his part.
When I came in he said at once, as though the question had been waiting on his lips,
what about souls? It was evident then that my surmise had been correct.
Unconscious celebration was doing its work, even with the lunatic.
I determined to have the matter out. What about them yourself? I asked. He did not reply for a
moment, but looked all around him, and up and down, as though he expected to find some inspiration
for an answer. I don't want any souls, he said in a feeble apologetic way. The matter seemed
praying on his mind, and so I determined to use it. To be cruel only to be kind. So I said,
you like life and you want life? Oh yes, but that is all right, you needn't worry about that.
But, I asked, how are we to get the life without getting the soul also? This seemed to puzzle him,
so I followed it up. A nice time you'll have some time when you're flying out there with the souls
of thousands of flies and spiders and birds and cats buzzing and twittering and moaning all around
you. You've got their lives, you know, and you must put up with their souls. Something seemed to
affect his imagination, for he put his fingers to his ears and shut his eyes, screwing them up
tightly just as a small boy does when his face is being soaked. There was something pathetic in it
that touched me. It also gave me a lesson, for it seemed that before me was a child, only a child,
though the features were worn and the stubble on the jaws was white. It was evident that he was
undergoing some process of mental disturbance, and knowing how his past moods had interpreted
things seemingly foreign to himself, I thought I would enter into his mind as well as I could
and go with him. The first step was to restore confidence, so I asked him, speaking pretty loud
so that he would hear me through his closed ears, would you like some sugar to get your
eyes around again? He seemed to wake up all at once and shook his head. With a laugh he replied,
not much, flies are poor things after all. After a pause, he added, but I don't want their souls
buzzing round me all the same, or spiders, I went on. Blow spiders, what's the use of spiders?
There isn't anything in them to eat, or he stopped suddenly as though reminded of a
second time he has suddenly stopped at the word drink. What does it mean?
Renfield seemed himself aware of having made a lapse, for he hurried on as though to distract
my attention from it. I don't take any stock at all in such matters. Rats and mice and such small
deer, as Shakespeare has it, chicken feed of the larder, they might be called. I'm past all that
sort of nonsense. You might as well ask a man to eat molecules with a pair of chopsticks, as to
try to interest me about the less carnivora, when I know of what is before me. I see, I said,
you want big things that you can make your teeth meet in. How would you like to breakfast on an
elephant? What ridiculous nonsense you are talking! He was getting too wide awake, so I thought I would
press him hard. I wonder, I said, reflectively, what an elephant's soul is like. The effect I
desired was obtained, for he at once fell from his high horse and became a child again.
I don't want an elephant's soul, or any soul at all, he said. For a few moments he sat despondently.
Suddenly he jumped to his feet, with his eyes blazing and all the signs of intense cerebral
excitement. To hell with you and your souls, he shouted. Why do you plague me about souls?
Haven't I got enough to worry and pain to distract me already without thinking of souls?
He looked so hostile that I thought he was in for another homicidal fit,
so I blew my whistle. The instant, however, that I did so, he became calm and said apologetically,
forgive me, doctor, I forgot myself. You do not need any help. I am so worried in my mind that
I am apt to be irritable. If you only knew the problem I have to face, and that I am working out,
you would pity and tolerate and pardon me. Pray do not put me in a straight waistcoat.
I want to think, and I cannot think freely when my body is confined. I am sure you will understand.
He had, evidently, self-control. So when the attendants came, I told them not to mind,
and they withdrew. Renfield watched them go. When the door was closed, he said,
with considerable dignity and sweetness, Dr. Seward, you have been very considerate towards me.
Believe me that I am very, very grateful to you.
I thought it well to leave him in this mood, and so I came away. There is certainly something to
ponder over in this man's state. Several points seem to make what the American interviewer calls
a story, if one could only get them in proper order. Here they are. Will not mention drinking.
Fears the thought of being burdened with the soul of anything. Has no dread of wanting life
in the future. Despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads being haunted by their
souls. Logically, all these things point one way. He has assurance of some kind that he will acquire
some higher life. He dreads the consequence, the burden of a soul. Then it is a human life he looks
to. And the assurance? Merciful God, the count has been to him, and there is some new scheme of
terror afoot. Later, I went after my round to Van Helsing and told him of my suspicion.
He grew very grave, and after thinking the matter over for a while, he asked me to take him to
Renfield. I did so. As we came to the door, we heard the lunatic within singing gaily,
as he used to do in the time which now seems so long ago. When we entered, we saw with amazement
that he had spread out his sugar as of old. The flies, lethargic with the autumn, were beginning
to buzz into the room. We tried to make him talk of the subject of our previous conversation,
but he would not attend. He went on with his singing, just as though we had not been present.
He had got a scrap of paper and was folding it into a notebook. We had to come away as
ignorant as we went in. His is a curious case indeed. We must watch him tonight.
Letter, Mitchell, Sons and Candy, to Lord Godelming. 1st October. My Lord! We are at all times
only too happy to meet your wishes. We beg, with regard to the desire of your lordship,
expressed by Mr Harker on your behalf, to supply the following information concerning the sale
and purchase of No. 347 Piccadilly. The original vendors are the executors of the late Mr Archibald
Winter Suffield. The purchaser is a foreign nobleman, Count de Ville, who affected the
purchase himself, paying the purchase money in notes, over the counter, if your lordship
will pardon us using so vulgar an expression. Beyond this, we know nothing whatever of him.
We are, my Lord, your lordship's humble servants, Mitchell, Sons and Candy.
Dr Seward's Diary. 2nd October. I placed a man in the corridor last night, and told him to make
an accurate note of any sound he might hear from Renfield's room, and gave him instructions that
if there should be anything strange he was to call me. After dinner, when we had all gathered round
the fire in the study, Mrs Harker having gone to bed, we discussed the attempts and discoveries
of the day. Harker was the only one who had any result, and we are in great hopes that his clue
may be an important one. Before going to bed, I went round to the patient's room and looked
in through the observation trap. He was sleeping soundly. His heart rose and fell with regular
respiration. This morning the man on duty reported to me that a little after midnight he was restless
and kept saying his prayers somewhat loudly. I asked him if that was all. He replied that it
was all he heard. There was something about his manner so suspicious that I asked him point blank
if he had been asleep. He denied sleep, but admitted to having dozed for a while.
It is too bad that men cannot be trusted unless they are watched.
Today Harker is out following up his clue, and Art and Quincy are looking after horses.
Godelming thinks that it would be well to have horses always in readiness,
for when we get the information which we seek there will be no time to lose.
We must sterilize all the imported earth between sunrise and sunset. We shall thus catch the count
at his weakest, and without a refuge to fly to. Van Helsing is off to the British Museum,
looking up some authorities on ancient medicine. The old physicians took account of things which
their followers do not accept, and the professor is searching for witch and demon cures which may
be useful to us later. I sometimes think we must be all mad and that we shall wake to sanity in
straight waistcoats. Later we have met again. We seem at last to be on the track, and our work
of tomorrow may be the beginning of the end. I wonder if Renfield's quiet has anything to do
with this. His moods have so followed the doings of the count that the coming destruction of the
monster may be carried to him some subtle way. If we could only get some hint as to what passed
in his mind between the time of my argument with him today and his resumption of fly-catching,
it might afford us a valuable clue. He is now seemingly quiet for a spell.
Is he? That wild yell seemed to come from his room. The attendant came bursting into my room
and told me that Renfield had somehow met with some accident. He had heard him yell,
and when he went to him found him lying on his face on the floor, all covered with blood.
I must go at once.
Let me put down with exactness all that happened, as well as I can remember,
since last I made an entry. Not a detail that I can recall must be forgotten,
in whole calmness I must proceed. When I came to Renfield's room I found him lying on the floor,
on his left side, in a glittering pool of blood. When I went to move him it became at once apparent
that he had received some terrible injuries. There seemed none of the unity of purpose between the
which marks even lethargic sanity. As the face was exposed I could see that it was horribly bruised,
as though it had been beaten against the floor. Indeed, it was from the face wounds that the pool
of blood originated. The attendant who was kneeling beside the body said to me as we turned him over,
I think, sir, his back is broken. See, both his right arm and leg and the whole side of his face
are paralyzed. How such a thing could have happened puzzled the attendant beyond measure.
He seemed quite bewildered and his brows were gathered in as he said,
I can't understand the two things. He could mark his face like that by beating his own head on the
floor. I saw a young woman do it once at the Eversfield Asylum before anyone could lay hands
on her. And I suppose he might have broken his neck by falling out of bed if he got in an awkward
kink. But for the life of me I can't imagine how the two things occurred. If his back was broke
he couldn't beat his head. And if his face was like that before the fall out of bed there would
be marks on it. I said to him, go to Dr. Van Helsing and ask him to kindly come here at once.
I want him without an instant's delay. The man ran off and within a few minutes the
professor in his dressing gown and slippers appeared. When he saw Renfield on the ground
he looked keenly at him a moment then turned to me. I think he recognized my thought in my eyes
for he said very quietly manifestly for the ears of the attendant. Ah, a sad accident.
He will need very careful watching and much attention. I shall stay with you myself,
but I shall first dress myself. If you will remain I shall in a few minutes join you.
The patient was now breathing stertoriously and it was easy to see that he had suffered some
terrible injury. Van Helsing returned with extraordinary celerity bearing with him a
surgical case. He had evidently been thinking and had his mind made up for almost before he looked
the patient he whispered to me, send the attendant away. We must be alone with him when he becomes
conscious after the operation. I said, I think that will do now Simmons. We have done all that
we can at present. You had better go your round and Dr. Van Helsing will operate. Let me know
instantly if there be anything unusual anywhere. The man withdrew and we went into a strict
examination of the patient. The wounds of the face were superficial. The real injury was at
the pressed fracture of the skull extending right up through the motor area. The professor thought a
moment and said, we must reduce the pressure and get back to normal conditions as far as can be.
The rapidity of the suffusion shows the terrible nature of his injury. The whole motor area seems
affected. The suffusion of the brain will increase quickly so he must cleft in at once or it may be
tapping at the door. I went over and opened it and found in the corridor without Arthur and
Quincy in pajamas and slippers. The former spoke, I heard your man call up Dr. Van Helsing and tell
him of an accident. So I woke Quincy or rather called for him as he was not asleep. Things are
moving too quickly and too strangely for sound sleep for any of us these times. I've been thinking
that tomorrow night we'll not see things as they have been. We'll have to look back and forward a
little more than we have done. May we come in? I nodded and held the door open till they had entered
then I closed it again. When Quincy saw the attitude and state of the patient and noted the
horrible pool on the floor he said softly, my God, what has happened to him? Poor, poor devil.
I told him briefly and added that we expected he would recover consciousness after the operation
for a short time at all events. He went at once and sat down on the edge of the bed with
a dollaming beside him. We all watched in patience. We shall wait, said Van Helsing,
just long enough to fix the best spot for roughening so that we may most quickly and
perfectly remove the blood clot for it is evident that the hemorrhage is increasing.
The minutes during which we waited passed with fearful slowness. I had a horrible sinking in my
heart and from Van Helsing's face I gathered that he felt some fear or apprehension as to what was
to come. I dreaded the words Renfield might speak. I was positively afraid to think.
But the conviction of what was coming was on me as I have read of men who have heard the death watch.
The poor man's breathing came in uncertain gasps. Each instant he seemed as though he would open
his eyes and speak but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath and he would relapse
into a more fixed insensibility. Inured as I was to sickbeds and death the suspense grew and grew
upon me. I could almost hear the beating of my own heart and the blood surging through my
temple sounded like blows from a hammer. Silence finally became agonizing. I looked at my companions
one after another and saw from their flushed faces and damp brows that they were enduring equal
torture. There was a nervous suspense over us all as though overhead some dread bell would
peel out powerfully when we should least expect it. At last there came a time when it was evident
the patient was sinking fast. He might die at any moment. I looked up at the professor and
caught his eyes fixed on mine. His face was sternly sad as he spoke. That is no time to lose.
His words may be worth many lives. I have been thinking so as I stood here.
It may be there is a soul at stake. We shall operate just above the ear.
Without another word he made the operation. For a few moments the breathing continued to be
then there came a breath so prolonged that it seemed as though it would tear open his chest.
Suddenly his eyes opened and became fixed in a wild helpless stare. This was continued for a
few moments then it was softened into a glad surprise and from his lips came a sigh of relief.
He moved convulsively and as he did so said I'll be quiet doctor tell them to take off the straight
waistcoat. I have had a terrible dream and it has left me so weak that I cannot move.
What's wrong with my face? It feels all swollen and it smarts dreadfully.
He tried to turn his head but even with the effort his eyes seemed to grow glassy again so
I gently put it back. Then Van Helsing said in a quiet gray voice. Tell us your dream Mr. Renfield.
As he heard the voice his face brightened through its mutilation and he said.
That is Dr. Van Helsing. How good it is of you to be here. Give me some water. My lips are dry
and I shall try to tell you. I dreamed. He stopped and seemed fainting. I called quietly to Quincy.
The brandy. It is in my study. Quick. He flew and returned to the glass. The decanter of brandy
and a carafe of water. We moistened the parts lips and the patient quickly revived. It seemed
however that his poor injured brain had been working in the interval for when he was quite
conscious he looked at me piercingly with an agonized confusion which I shall never forget
and said I must not deceive myself it was no dream but all a grim reality
then his eyes roved around the room as they caught sight of the two figures sitting patiently on the
edge of the bed he went on if I were not sure already I would know from them for an instant
his eyes closed not with pain or sleep but voluntarily as though he were bringing all his
faculties to bear when he opened them he said hurriedly and with more energy than he had yet
displayed quick doctor quick I am dying I feel that I have but a few minutes and then I must go
back to death or worse wet my lips with brandy again I have something that I must say before I
die or before my crushed brain dies anyhow thank you it was that night after you left me when I
implored you to let me go away I couldn't speak then for I felt my tongue was tied but I was as
despair for a long time after you left me it seemed hours then there came a sudden peace to
me my brain seemed to become cool again and I realized where I was I heard the dogs bark
behind our house but not where he was as he spoke Van Helsing's eyes never blinked but his hand came
out and met mine and gripped it hard he did not however betray himself he nodded slightly and said
gone in a low voice
Renfield proceeded he came up to the window in the mist as I had seen him often before but he
was solid then not a ghost and his eyes were fierce like a man's when angry he was laughing
with his red mouth the sharp white teeth glinted in the moonlight when he turned to look back over
the belt of trees to where the dogs were barking I wouldn't ask him to come in at first though I knew
he wanted to just as he had wanted all along then he began promising me things not in words but by
doing them he was interrupted by a word from the professor how by making them happen just as he
used to send in the flies when the sun was shining great big fat ones with steel and sapphire on their
wings and big moths in the night with skull and crossbones on their backs Van Helsing nodded to
him and he whispered to me unconsciously the acarantia atropos of the sphinges what you call
the death's head moth the patient went on without stopping then he began to whisper rats rats rats
hundreds thousands millions of them and everyone in life and dogs to eat them and cats too all
lives all red blood with years of life in it and not merely buzzing flies I laughed at him for I
wanted to see what he could do then the dogs howled away beyond the dark trees in his house
he beckoned me to the window I got up and looked out and he raised his hands and seemed to call out
without using any words a dark mass spread over the grass coming on like the shape of a flame of
fire and then he moved the mist to the right and left and I could see that there were thousands of
rats with their eyes blazing red like his only smaller he held up his hand and they all stopped
and I thought he seemed to be saying all these lies will I give you I am many more and greater
through countless ages if you will fall down and worship me and then a red cloud like the color of
blood seemed to close over my eyes and before I knew what I was doing I found myself opening
the sash and saying to him come in lord and master the rats were all gone but he slid into the room
through the sash though it was only open an inch wide just as the moon herself has often come in
the tiniest crack and it stood before me in all her size and splendor his voice was weaker so I
moistened his lips with the brandy again and he continued but it seemed as though his memory had
gone on working in the interval for his story was further advanced I was about to call him back to
the point but Van Helsing whispered to me let him go on do not interrupt him he could not go back
and maybe he could not proceed at all if once he lost the thread of his thought
he proceeded all day I waited to hear from him but he did not send me anything not even a blow
fly and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him when he did slide into the window though
it was shut and did not even knock I got mad with him he sneered at me and his white face looked out
of the mist with his red eyes gleaming and he went on as though he owned the whole place and I was
he didn't even smell the same as he went by me I couldn't hold him
I thought that somehow Mrs. Harker had come into the room the two men sitting on the bed stood up
and came over standing behind him so that he could not see them but where they could hear better
they were both silent but the professor started and quivered his face however grew grimmer and
sterner still Renfield went on without noticing when Mrs. Harker came in to see me this afternoon
she wasn't the same it was like tea after the teapot has been watered here we all moved but
no one said a word he went on I didn't know that she was here till she spoke and she didn't look
the same I don't care for the pale people I like them with lots of blood in them and hers all seem
to have run out I didn't think of it at the time but when she went away I began to think and it
made me mad to know that he had been taking the life out of her I could feel that the rest quivered
as I did but we remained otherwise still so when he came tonight I was ready for him I saw the mist
stealing in and I grabbed it tight I had heard that madmen have unnatural strength and as I knew
I was a madman at times anyhow I resolved to use my power and he felt it too for he had to come out
of the mist to struggle with me I held tight and I thought I was going to win for I didn't mean him
to take any more of her life till I saw his eyes they burned into me and my strength became like
water he slipped through it and when I tried to cling to him he raised me up and flung me down
there was a red cloud before me and a noise like thunder and the mist seemed to steal away under
the door his voice was becoming fainter and his breath more stertorous Van Helsing stood up
instinctively we know the worst now he said he is here and we know his purpose it may not be too late
let us be armed the same as we were the other night but lose no time there is not an instant to spare
there was no need to put our fear nay our conviction into words we shared them in common
we all hurried and took from our rooms the same things that we had when we entered the count's
house the professor had his ready and as we met in the corridor he pointed to them significantly
as he said they never leave me and they shall not till this unhappy business is over be wise also
my friends it is no common enemy that we deal with alas alas that the amino should suffer
he stopped his voice was breaking and i do not know if rage or terror predominated in my own heart
outside the harker's door we paused artin quincy held back and the latter said
should we disturb her we must said van helsing grimly if the door be locked i shall break it in
may it not frighten her terribly it is unusual to break in to a lady's room
van helsing said solemnly you are always right but this is life and death all chambers are
like to the doctor and even were they not they are all as one to me tonight fringe on when i
turn the handle if the door does not open do you put your shoulder down and shove and you flew my
friends now he turned the handle as he spoke but the door did not yield we threw ourselves against
it with a crash it burst open and we almost fell headlong into the room the professor did actually
fall and i saw across him as he gathered himself up from hands and knees what i saw appalled me i
felt my hair rise like bristles on the back of my neck my heart seemed to stand still the moonlight
was so bright that through the thick yellow blind the room was light enough to see on the bed beside
the window lay jonathan harker his face flushed and breathing heavily as though in a stupor
kneeling on the near edge of the bed facing outwards was the white clad figure of his wife
by her stood a tall thin man clad in black his face was turned from us but the instant we saw
we all recognized the count in every way even to the scar on his forehead with his left hand
he held both mrs harker's hands keeping them away with her arms at full tension his right
hand gripped her by the back of the neck forcing her face down on his bosom her white night dress
was smeared with blood and a thin stream trickled down the man's bare chest which was shown by his
open dress the attitude of the two had a terrible resemblance to a child forcing a kitten's nose
into a saucer of milk to compel it to drink as we burst into the room the count turned his face
and the hellish look that i had heard described seemed to leap into it his eyes flamed red with
devilish passion the great nostrils of the white aquiline nose opened wide and quivered at the edge
and the white sharp teeth behind the full lips of the blood dripping mouth clamped together like
those of a wild beast with a wrench which threw his victim back upon the bed as though hurled from
a height he turned and sprang at us but by this time the professor had gained his feet and was
holding toward him the envelope which contained the sacred wafer the count suddenly stopped just
as poor lucy had done outside the tomb and cowered back further and further back he cowered as we
lifting our crucifixes advanced the moonlight suddenly failed as a great black cloud sailed
across the sky and when the gaslight sprang up under quincy's match we saw nothing but a faint
vapor this as we looked trailed under the door which with the recoil from its bursting open had
swung back to its old position van helsing art and i moved forward to mrs harker who by this time had
drawn her breath and with it had given a scream so wild so ear piercing so despairing that it seems
to me now that it will ring in my ears till my dying day for a few seconds she lay in her helpless
attitude and disarray her face was ghastly with a pallor which was accentuated by the blood which
smeared her lips and cheeks and chin from her throat trickled a thin stream of blood her eyes
were mad with terror then she put before her face her poor crushed hands which bore on their
whiteness the red mark of the count's terrible grip and from behind them came a low desolate
whale which made the terrible scream seem only the quick expression of an endless grief
van helsing stepped forward and drew the coverlet gently over her body
whilst art after looking at her face for an instant despairingly ran out of the room
van helsing whispered to me jonathan is in a stupa such as we know the vampire can produce
we can do nothing with poor madam mina for a few moments till she recovers herself i must wake him
he dipped the end of a towel in cold water and with it began to flick him on the face his wife
all the while holding her face between her hands and sobbing in a way that was heartbreaking to
hear i raised the blind and looked out of the window there was much moonshine and as i looked
i could see quincy morris run across the lawn and hide himself in the shadow of a great yew tree
it puzzled me to think why he was doing this but at the instant i heard harcourt's quick
exclamation as he woke to partial consciousness and turned to the bed on his face as there might
was a look of wild amazement he seemed dazed for a few seconds and then full consciousness seemed
to burst upon him all at once and he started up his wife was aroused by the quick movement
and turned to him with her arms stretched out as though to embrace him instantly however she drew
them in again and putting her elbows together held her hands before her face and shuddered
till the bed beneath her shook in god's name what does this mean harker cried out dr seward dr van
helsing what is it what has happened what is wrong mean it dear what is it and what does that
blood mean my god my god has it come to this and raising himself to his knees he beat his hands
wildly together good god help us help her oh help her with a quick movement he jumped from the bed
and began to pull on his clothes all the man in him awake at the need for instant exertion
what has happened tell me all about it he cried without pausing
dr van helsing you love mina i know oh do something to save her it cannot have gone too far yet
guard her while i look for him his wife through her terror and horror and distress saw some sure
danger to him instantly forgetting her own grief she sees hold of him and cried out no no jonathan
you must not leave me i have suffered enough tonight god knows without the dread of his harming
you must stay with me stay with these friends who will watch over you her expression became
frantic as she spoke and he yielding to her she pulled him down sitting on the bedside
and clung to him fiercely van helsing and i tried to calm them both the professor held up his golden
crucifix and said with wonderful calmness do not fear my dear we are here and whilst this is close
to you no foul thing can approach you are safe for tonight and we must be calm and take counsel together
she shuddered and was silent holding down her head on her husband's breast when she raised it
his white night robe was stained with blood where her lips had touched and where the thin open wound
in the neck had sent forth drops the instant she saw it she drew back with a low wail and whispered
amid the choking sobs unclean unclean i must touch him or kiss him no more but that it should be that
it is i who am now his worst enemy and whom he may have most caused to fear to this he spoke out
nonsense it is a shame to me to hear such a word i would not hear it of you and i shall not hear
it from you may god judge me by my desserts and punish me with more bitter suffering than even
this hour if by any act or will of mine anything ever come between us he put out his arms and
folded her to his breast and for a while she lay there sobbing he looked at us over her bowed head
eyes that blinked amply above his quivering nostrils his mouth was set as steel
after a while her sods became less frequent and more faint and then he said to me speaking with
a steady calmness which i felt tried his nervous power to the utmost and now dr seward tell me all
about it too well i know the broad fact tell me all that has been i told him exactly what had
happened and he listened with seeming impassiveness but his nostrils twitched and his eyes blazed as
i told how the ruthless hands of the count had held his wife in that terrible and horrid position
with her mouth to the open wound in his breast it interested me even at that moment to see that
whilst the face of white set passion worked convulsively over the bowed head the hands
tenderly and lovingly stroked the ruffled hair just as i had finished quincy and godalming knocked
at the door they entered in obedience to our summons van helsing looked at me questioningly
i understood him to mean if we were to take advantage of their coming to divert if possible
the thought to the unhappy husband and wife from each other and from themselves so on nodding
acquiescence to him he asked them what they had seen or done to which lord godalming answered
i could not see him anywhere in the passage or in any of our rooms i looked in the study but though
he had been there he had gone he had however he stopped suddenly looking at the poor drooping
figure on the bed van helsing said gravely go on friend arthur we want him no more concealments
our hope now is in knowing all tell freely so art went on he had been there and though it could only
have been for a few seconds he had made rare hay of the place all the manuscript had been burned
and the blue flames were flickering among the white ashes the cylinders your phonograph too were
thrown on the fire and the wax had helped the flames here i interrupted thank god there is
another copy in the safe his face lit for a moment but fell again as he went on i ran downstairs and
but could see no sign of him i looked into windfield's room but there was no trace except
again he paused go on said harker hoarsely so he bowed his head and moistening his lips with his
tongue added except that the poor fellow is dead mrs harker raised her head looking for one to the
of us she said solemnly god's will be done i could not feel that art was keeping back something
but as i took it that it was with a purpose i said nothing van helsing turned to morris and asked
have you any to tell a little he answered it may be much eventually but at present i can't say
i thought it well to know if possible where the count would go when he left the house
i did not see him but i saw a bat rise from renfield's window and flap westward
i expected to see him in some shape go back to carfax but he evidently sought some other lair
he will not be back tonight for the sky is reddening in the east and the dawn is close
we must work tomorrow said the latter words through his shut teeth for a space of perhaps
a couple of minutes they were silent and i could fancy that i could hear the sound of our hearts
beating then van helsing said placing his hand tenderly on mrs harker's head
and now madam mina poor dear dead madam mina tell us exactly what happened god knows that
i do not want that you be pained but it is need that we know all for now more than ever has all
work to be done quick and sharp and in deadly earnest the day is close to us that must end all
if it may be so and now is the chance that we may live and learn the poor dear lady shivered
i could see the tension of her nerves as she clasped her husband closer to her and bent her
head lower and lower still on his breast then she raised her head proudly and held out one hand to
van helsing who took it in his and after stooping and kissing it reverently held it fast the other
hand was locked in that of her husband who held his other arm thrown around her protectingly
after a pause in which she was evidently ordering her thoughts she began
I took the sleeping draught which you had so kindly given me but for a long time it did not
act i seemed to become more wakeful and myriads of horrible fancies began to crowd in upon my
mind all of them connected with death and vampires with blood and pain and trouble her husband
involuntarily groaned and as she turned to him and said lovingly do not fret dear you must be
brave and strong and help me through this horrible task if you only knew what an effort it is to me
tell of this fearful thing at all you would understand how much i need your help well i
saw i must try to help the medicine to do its work with my will if it was to do me any good
so i resolutely set myself to sleep sure enough sleep must soon have come to me for i remember
no more jonathan coming in had not waked me for he lay by my side when next i remember there was
in the room the same thin white mist that i had before noticed but i forget now if you know of
you will find it in my diary which i shall show you later i felt the same vague terror which had
come to me before and the same sense of some presence i turned to wake jonathan but found
that he slept so soundly that it seemed as if it was he who had taken the sleeping draught and not
i i tried but i could not wake him this caused me a great fear and i looked around terrified
then indeed my heart sank within me beside the bed as if he had stepped out of the mist
or rather as if the midst had turned into his figure for it had entirely disappeared
stood a tall thin man all in black i knew him at once from the description of the others
the waxen face the high aquiline nose on which the light fell in a thin white line
the parted red lips with the sharp white teeth showing between and the red eyes that i had
seemed to see in the sunset on the windows of saint mary's church of whitby i knew too the
heart stood still and i would have screamed out only that i was paralyzed in the pause he spoke
in a sort of keen cutting whisper pointing as he spoke to jonathan silence if you make a sound i
shall take him and dash his brains out before your very eyes i was appalled and was too bewildered
to do or say anything with a mocking smile he placed one hand upon my shoulder and holding
me tight bared my throat with the other saying as he did so first a little refreshment to reward
my excessions you may as well be quiet it is not the first time or the second that your veins have
appeased my thirst i was bewildered and strangely enough i did not want to hinder him i suppose it
is a part of the horrible curse that such is when his touch is on his victim and oh my god my god
pity me he placed his reeking lips upon my throat her husband groaned again she clasped his hand
and looked at him pityingly as if he were the injured one and went on i felt my strength fading
away and i was in a half swoon how long this horrible thing lasted i know not but it seemed
that a long time must have passed before he took his foul awful sneering mouth away i saw it drip
with a fresh blood the remembrance seemed for a while to overpower her and she drooped and would
have sunk down but for her husband's sustaining arm with a great effort she recovered herself and
on then he spoke to me mockingly and so you like the others would play your brains against mine
you would help these men to hunt me and frustrate me in my design you know now and they know in part
already and will know in full before long what it is to cross my path they should have kept their
energies for use closer to home whilst they played wits against me against me who commanded nations
and intrigued for them and fought for them hundreds of years before they were born i was
countermining them and you their best beloved one are now to me flesh of my flesh blood of my blood
kin of my kin my bountiful wine press for a while and shall be later on my companion and my helper
you shall be avenged in turn for not one of them but shall minister to your needs but as yet you
are to be punished for what you have done you have aided in thwarting me now you shall come to my call
where my brain says come to you you shall cross land or sea to do my bidding and to that end this
with that he pulled open his shirt and with his long sharp nails opened a vein in his breast
when the blood began to spread out he took my hands in one of his holding them tight and with
the other seized my neck and pressed my mouth to the wound so that i must either suffocate or swallow
some to the oh my god my god what have i done what have i done to deserve such a fate i who have
tried to walk in meekness and righteousness all my days god pity me look down on a poor soul in worse
and mortal peril and in mercy pity those to whom she is dear then she began to rub her lips as
though to cleanse them from pollution as she was telling her terrible story the eastern sky began
to quicken and everything became more and more clear harker was still and quiet but over his face
as the awful narrative went on came a gray look which deepened and deepened in the morning light
till when the first red streak of the coming dawn shot up the flesh stood darkly out against the
hair we have arranged that one of us is to stay within call of the unhappy pair till we can meet
together and arrange about taking action of this i am sure the sun rises today on no more miserable
house in all the great round of its daily course
22. Jonathan Harker's Journal. October 3. As I must do something or go mad,
I write this diary. It is now six o'clock, and we are to meet in the study in half an hour and take something to eat, for Dr. Valhalla Singh and Dr. Seward are agreed that if we do not eat we cannot work our best. Our best will be, God knows, required to-day.
I must keep writing at every chance, for I dare not stop to think. All, big and little, must go down. Perhaps at the end the little things may teach us most. The teaching, big or little, could not have landed Mina or me anywhere worse than we are to-day. However, we must trust and hope.
Poor Mina told me just now, with tears running down her dear cheeks, that it is in trouble and trial that our faith is tested, that we must keep on trusting, and that God will aid us up to the end. The end! Oh my God, what end! To work! To work!
When Dr. Valhalla Singh and Dr. Seward had come back from seeing poor Renfield, we went gravely into what was to be done. First, Dr. Seward told us that when he and Dr. Van Helmsing had gone down to the room below, they had found Renfield lying on the floor, all in a heap. His face was all bruised and crushed in, and the bones of the neck were broken.
Dr. Seward asked the attendant who was on duty in the passage if he had heard anything. He said that he had been sitting down, he confessed to half-dosing, when he heard loud voices in the room, and that Renfield had called out loudly several times, God, God, God! After that there was the sound of falling. When he entered the room he found him lying on the floor, face down, just as the doctors had seen him.
Van Helmsing asked if he had heard voices, or a voice, and he said he could not say, that at first it had seemed to him as if there were two, but as there was no one in the room, it could have been only one. He could swear to it, if required, that the word God was spoken by the patient.
Dr. Seward said to us, when we were alone, that he did not wish to go into the matter. The question of an inquest had to be considered, and it would never do to put forward the truth, as no one would believe it. As it was, he thought that on the attendant's evidence he could give a certificate of death by misadventure in falling from bed. In case the coroner should demand it, there would be a formal inquest, necessarily to the same result.
When the question began to be discussed as to what should be our next step, the very first thing we decided was that Mina should be in full confidence, that nothing of any sort, no matter how painful, should be kept from her. She herself agreed to its wisdom, and it was pitiful to see her so brave and yet so sorrowful and in such depth of despair.
There must be no concealment, she said. Alas, we have had too much already, and besides, there is nothing in all the world that can give me more pain than I have already endured, than I suffer now. Whatever may happen, it must be of new hope or of new courage to me.
Van Helsing was looking at her fixately as she spoke, and said, suddenly but quietly,
But dear Madam Mina, are you not afraid? Not for yourself, but for others from yourself, after what has happened?
Her face grew set in its lines, but her eyes shunned with the devotion of a martyr as she answered,
Ah, no, for my mind is made up.
To what? he asked gently, whilst we were all very still, for each in our own way, we had a sort of vague idea of what she meant.
Her answer came with direct simplicity, as though she were simply stating a fact.
Because, if I find it in myself, and I shall certainly watch keenly for it, a sign of harm to any that I love, I shall die.
You would kill yourself? he asked hoarsely.
I would, if there were no friend who loved me, who would save me from such a pain and so desperate an effort.
She looked at him meaningly as she spoke. He was sitting down, but now he rose and came close to her and put his hand on her head, as he said solemnly,
My child, there is such a one, if it were for your good, for myself.
I could hold it in my account with God to find such a euthanasia for you, even at this moment, if it were best, nay, if it were safe.
But my child, for a moment he seemed choked, and a great sob rose in his throat. He gulped down and went on.
There are here some who would stand between you and death. You must not die. You must not die by any hand, but least of all your own.
Until the other, who has fouled your sweet life, is true dead, you must not die.
For if he is still with the quick undead, your death would make you even as he is.
No, you must live. You must struggle and strive to live, though death would seem a boon unspeakable.
You must fight death himself, though he come to you in pain or in joy.
By the day or the night, in safety or in peril, on your living soul I charge you that you do not die, nay, nor think of death.
Till this great evil be past.
The poor dear grew white as death, and shook and shivered as I have seen a quicksand shiver and shake at the incoming of a tide.
We were all silent. We could do nothing. At length she grew more calm, and turning to him said sweetly, but oh, so sorrowfully as she held out her hand,
I promise you, my dear friend, that if God will let me live I shall strive to do so, till if it may be in his good time this horror may have passed from me.
She was so good and brave that we all felt that our hearts were strengthened to work and endure for her, and we began to discuss what we were to do.
I told her that she was to have all the papers in the safe, and all the papers or diaries and phonographs that we might hereafter use, and was to keep the record as she had done before.
She was pleased with the prospect of anything to do, if pleased could be used in connection with so grim an interest.
As usual, Van Helsing had thought ahead of everyone else, and was prepared with an exact ordering of our work.
It is perhaps well, he said, that at our meeting after our visit to Carfax we decided not to do anything with the earth-boxes that lay there.
Had we done so, the Count must have guessed our purpose, and would doubtless have taken measures in advance to frustrate such effort as regard to the others.
But now he does not know our intentions. Nay, more in all probability he does not know that such a power exists to us as can sterilize its layers, so that he cannot use them as of old.
We are now so much further advanced in our knowledge as to their disposition, that when we have examined the house in Piccadilly we may track the very last of them.
Today then is ours, and in it rests our hope. The sun that rose on our sorrow this morning guards us in its course.
Until it sets tonight that monster must retain whatever form he now has. He is confined within the limitations of his earthly envelope.
He cannot melt into thin air, nor disappear through cracks or chinks or crannies. If he goes through a doorway he must open the door like a mortal.
And so we have this day to hunt down all his layers and sterilize them. So we shall, if we have not yet catch him and destroy him, drive him to bay in some place where the catching and the destroying shall be in time, sure.
Here I started up, for I could not contain myself of the thought that the minutes and seconds so preciously laden with Nina's life and happiness were flying from us, since whilst we talked action was impossible.
But Van Helsing held up his hand warningly.
Nay, friend Jonathan, he said, in this the quickest way home is the longest way, so your Proverbs say.
We shall all act and act with desperate quick when the time has come. But think, in all probable the key of the situation is in that house in Piccadilly.
The Count may have many houses which he has bought. Of them he will have deeds of purchase, keys and other things. He will have paper that he write on. He will have his books of checks.
There are so many belongings that he must have somewhere. Why not in this place so central, so quiet, where he come and go by the front or the back at all hours, when in the very vast of the traffic there is none to notice?
We shall go there and search that house, and when we learn what it holds, then we do what our friend Arthur calls, in his praises of hunt, stop the earth, and so we run down our old fox. So, is it no?
Then let us come at once, I cried. We are wasting the precious precious time.
The Professor did not move, but simply said, And how are we to get into that house in Piccadilly?
Anyway, I cried, we shall break in if need be.
And your police? Where will they be, and what will they say?
I was staggered, but I knew that if he wished to delay, he had a good reason for it. So I said as quietly as I could,
Don't wait more than need be. You know I am sure what torture I am in.
Ah, my child, that I do, and indeed there is no wish of me to add to your anguish. But just think what can we do until all the world be at movement?
Then will come our time. I have thought and thought, and it seems to me the simplest way is the best of all.
Now, we wish to get into the house, but we have no key. Is it not so? I nodded.
Now, suppose that you were in truth the owner of the house, and could not still get in, and think there was to you no conscience of the house-breaker, what would you do?
I should get me a respectable locksmith, and set him to work to pick the luck for me.
And your police, they would interfere, would they not? Oh no, not if they knew the man was properly employed.
Then, he looked at me as keenly as he spoke, all that is in doubt is the conscience of the employer, and the belief of your policeman as to whether or not that employer has a good conscience or a bad one.
Your police must indeed be zealous men and clever, oh, so clever in reading the heart that they trouble themselves in such matter.
No, no, my friend Jonathan, you go take the luck of a hundred empty houses in this year London, or of any city in the world.
And if you do it, as such things are rightly done, and at the time such things are rightly done, no one will interfere.
I have read of a gentleman who owned a so fine house in London, and when he went for months of summer to Switzerland, and locked up his house, some burglar come, and broke window at back, and got in.
Then he went, and made open the shutters in front, and walked out and in through the door, before the very eyes of the police.
Then he had an auction in that house, and advertised it, and put up big notice, and when the day come, he sell off by a great auctioneer all the goods of that other man who owned them.
Then he go to a builder, and he sell him that house, making an agreement that he pull it down and take all away within a certain time, and your police and other authorities helped him all they can.
And when that owner come back from his holiday in Switzerland, he find only an empty hole where his house had been.
This was all done in wrong way, and in our work we shall be on wrong way too.
We shall not go so early that policemen who have little to think of, shall deem it strange.
But we shall go after ten o'clock, when there are many about, and such things would be done were we indeed owners of the house.
I could not but see how right he was, and the terrible despair of Mina's face became relaxed in thought.
There was hope in such good counsel.
Then Helsing went on,
When once within the house we may find more clues.
At any rate, some of us can remain there, whilst the rest find the other places where there be more earth-boxes, at Bermondsey and Miles End.
Lord Godlimbering stood up.
I can be of some use here, he said.
I shall wire to my people to have horses and carriages where they will be most convenient.
Look here, old fellow, said Morris.
It is a capital idea to have already in case you want to go horse-packing.
But don't you think that one of your snappy carriages, with its heraldic adornments, in a by-way of Walsworth or Miles End, would attract too much attention for our purpose?
It seems to me we ought to take cabs when we go south or east, or even leave them somewhere near the neighbourhood where we are going to.
Friend Quincy is right, said the Professor.
His head is what you call in plain with the horizon.
It is a difficult thing that we go to do, and we do not want no peoples to watch us, if so it may.
Mina took a growing interest in everything, and I was rejoiced to see that the exigencies of affairs was helping her to forget for a time the terrible experience of the night.
She was very, very pale, almost ghastly, and so thin that her lips were drawn away, showing her teeth in somewhat of prominence.
I did not mention this last, lest it should give her needless pain, but it made my blood run cold in my veins to think of what had occurred with poor Lucy when the Count had sucked her blood.
As yet there was no sign of the teeth growing sharper, but the time was as yet short, and there was time for fear.
When we came to the discussion of the sequence of our efforts and of the disposition of our forces, there were new sources of doubt.
It was finally agreed that before starting for Piccadilly we should destroy the Count's lair close at hand.
In case he should find it out too soon, we would thus still be ahead of him in our work of destruction, and his presence in his purely material shape and at his weakest might give us some new clue.
As to the disposition of forces, it was suggested by the Professor that after our visit to Carfax we should all enter the house in Piccadilly, that the two doctors and I should remain there whilst Lord Godamring and Quincy found the lairs at Wallsworth and Miles End and destroyed them.
It was possible, if not likely, the Professor urged, that the Count may appear in Piccadilly during the day, and that if so, we might be able to cope with him there and then. At any rate, we might be able to follow him in force.
To this plan I strenuously objected, and so far as my going was concerned, for I said that I intended to stay and protect Mina.
I thought that my mind was made up on this subject, but Mina would not listen to my objections. She said that that might be some law matter in which I could be useful, that amongst the Count's papers might be some clue which I could understand out of my experience in Transylvania, and that, as it was, all the strength we could muster was required to cope with the Count's extraordinary power.
I had to give in, for Mina's resolution was fixed. She said that it was the last hope for her that we should all work together.
As for me, she said, I have no fear. Things have been as bad as they can be, and whatever may happen must have in it some element of hope or comfort. Go, my husband, God can, if He wishes it, guard me as well alone as with any one present.
So I started up crying out, Then in God's name let us come at once, for we are losing time. The Count may come to Piccadilly earlier than we think.
Not so, said Van Helsing, holding up his hand. But why, I asked.
Do you forget, he said, with actually a smile, that last night he banqueted heavily and will sleep late?
Did I forget? Shall I ever? Can I ever? Can any of us ever forget that terrible scene?
Mina struggled hard to keep her brave countenance, but the pain overmastered her, and she put her hands before her face and shuddered whilst she moaned.
Van Helsing had not intended to recall her frightful experience. He had simply lost sight of her and her part in the affair in his intellectual effort. When it struck him what he said, he was horrified at his thoughtlessness and tried to comfort her.
Oh, Madame Mina, he said, dear, dear Madame Mina, alas, that I, of all who so reverence you, should have said anything so forgetful.
These stupid old lips of mine and the stupid old head do not deserve so, but you will forget it, will you not? He bent low beside her as he spoke.
She took his hand, and looking at him through her tears, said hoarsely, No, I shall not forget, for it is well that I remember, and with it I have so much in memory of you that is sweet that I take it all together.
Now, you must all be going soon. Breakfast is ready, and we must all eat, that we may be strong.
Breakfast was a strange meal to us all. We tried to be cheerful and encourage each other, and Mina was the brightest and most cheerful of us.
When it was over, Van Helsing stood up and said, Now, my dear friends, we go forth to our terrible enterprise. Are we all armed, as we were on that night when first we visited our enemy's lair, armed against ghostly as well as carnal attacks?
We all assured him, Then it is well. Now, Madam Mina, you are in any case quite safe here until the sunset, and before then we shall return, if, we shall return.
But before we go, let me see you armed against personal attack. I have myself, since you came down, prepared your chamber by the placing of things of which we know, so that he may not enter.
Now let me guard yourself. On your forehead I touched this piece of sacred wafer in the name of the father, the son, and there was a fearful scream which almost froze our hearts to hear.
As he had placed the wafer on Mina's forehead, it had seared it, had burnt into the flesh, as though it had been a piece of white-hot metal.
My poor darling's brain had told her the significance of the fact as quickly as her nerves received the pain of it, and the two so overwhelmed her that her overwrought nature had its voice in that dreadful scream.
But the words to her thought came quickly. The echo of the scream had not ceased to ring on the air when there came the reaction, and she sank on her knees on the floor in an agony of abasement.
Pulling her beautiful hair over her face, as the leper of all his mantles she wailed out,
Unclean, unclean! Even the Almighty shuns my polluted flesh. I must bear this mark of shame on my forehead until Judgment Day.
They all paused. I had thrown myself beside her in an agony of helpless grief, and putting my arms around her, held her tight.
For a few moments our sorrowful hearts beat together, while the friends around us turned away their eyes that ran tears silently.
Then, when Helsing turned and said gravely, so gravely that I could not help feeling that he was in some way inspired, and was stating things outside himself,
It may be that you shall have to bear that mark till God himself sees fit, as he most surely shall on that Judgment Day, to redress all wrongs of the earth and of his children that he has placed thereon.
And, O Madamina, my dear, my dear, may we who love you be there to see when that red scar, the sign of God's knowledge of what has been, shall pass away, and leave your forehead as pure as the heart we know.
For so surely as we live, that scar shall pass away when God sees right to lift the burden that is hard upon us. Till then we bear our cross, as his son did in obedience to his will.
It may be that we are chosen instruments of his good pleasure, and that we ascend to his bidding as that other through stripes and shame, through fears and blood, through doubts and fear, and all that makes the difference between God and man.
There was hope in his voice, and comfort, and the need for resignation. Mina and I both felt so, and simultaneously we each took one of the old man's hands, bent over it, and kissed it.
Then, without a word, we all knelt down together, and all holding hands, swore to be true to each other. We men pledged ourselves to raise the veil of sorrow from the head of her whom each in his own way we loved, and we prayed for help and guidance in the terrible task which lay before us.
It was then time to start. So I said farewell to Mina, a parting which neither of us shall forget to our dying day, and we set out.
To one thing I have made up my mind. If we find out that Mina must be a vampire in the end, then she shall not go into that unknown and terrible land alone. I suppose it is thus that in old times one vampire meant many. Just as their hideous bodies could only rest in sacred earth, so the holiest love was the recruiting sergeant for their ghastly ranks.
We entered Carfax without trouble, and found all things the same as on that first occasion. It was hard to believe that amongst so prosaic surroundings of neglect and dust and decay there was any ground for such fear as already we knew.
Had not our minds been made up, and had there not been terrible memories to spur us on, we could hardly have proceeded with our tasks. We found no papers or any sign of use in the house, and in the old chapel the great boxers looked just as we had seen them last.
Dr. Van Helsing said to us solemnly as we stood before him,
As he spoke, he took from his bag a screwdriver and a wrench, and very soon the top of one of the cases was thrown open. The earth smelled musty and close, but we did not somehow seem to mind, for our attention was concentrated on the professor.
Taking from his box a piece of the sacred wafer, he laid it down reverently on the earth, and then shutting down the lid began to screw it home, we aiding him as he worked.
One by one we treated in the same way each of the great boxes, and left them as we had found them to all appearances, but in each was a portion of the host.
When we closed the door behind us, the professor said solemnly,
So much is already done. It may be that with all the others we can be so successful. Then the sunset of this evening may shine of Madame Mina's forehead all white as ivory and with no stain.
As we passed across the lawn, on our way to the station to catch our train, we could see the front of the asylum. I looked eagerly, and in the window of my own room saw Mina.
I waved my hand to her, and nodded to tell that our work there was successfully accomplished. She nodded in reply to show that she understood.
The last I saw her she was waving her hand in farewell. It was with a heavy heart that we sought the station and just caught the train, which was steaming in as we reached the platform. I have written this in the train.
Under the circumstances, it wouldn't seem so bad for us to break into an empty house. But you are a solicitor, and the Incorporated Law Society might tell you that you should have known better.
I demurred as to my not sharing any danger, even of odium. But he went on, Besides, it will attract less attention if there are not too many of us. My title will make it all right with the locksmith, and with any police that might come along.
You had better go with Jack and the Professor and stay in Green Park, somewhere in sight of the house. And when you see the door opened and the Smith has gone away, do you all come across? We shall be on the lookout for you, and shall let you in.
The advice is good, said Van Helsing, so we said no more. Gordon Ling and Morris hurried off in a cab, we following in another. At the corner of Arlington Street, our contingent got out and strolled into the Green Park.
My heart beat as I saw the house on which so much of our hope was centered, looming up grim and silent in its deserted condition amongst its more lively and spruced-up neighbours.
We sat down on a bench within good view, and began to smoke cigars so as to attract as little attention as possible. The minutes seemed to pass with leaden feet as we waited for the coming of the others.
At length we saw a four-wheeler drive up. Out of it, in leisurely fashion, got Lord Godumring and Morris, and down from the box descended a fixed-set working man with his rush-woven basket of tools.
Morris paid the cabman, who touched his hat, and drove away. Together the two ascended the steps, and Lord Godumring pointed out what he wanted done.
The workman took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one of the spikes of the rail, saying something to the policeman who just then sauntered by.
The policeman nodded acquaince, and the man kneeling down placed his bag beside him. After searching through it, he took out a selection of tools, which he proceeded to lay beside him in orderly fashion.
Then he stood up, looked in the keyhole, blew into it, and turning to his employers, made some remark.
Lord Godumring smiled, and the man lifted a good-sized bunch of keys. Selecting one of them, he began to probe the lock, as if feeling his way with it.
After fumbling about for a bit, he tried a second and then a third. All at once the door opened under a slight push from him, and he and the two others entered the hall.
We sat still. My own cigar burned furiously, but Van Helsing's went cold altogether. We waited patiently, as we saw the workman come out and bring his bag.
Then he held the door partly open, steadying it with his knees, whilst he fitted a key to the lock. This he finally handed to Lord Godumring, who took out his purse and gave him something.
The man touched his hat, took his bag, put on his coat, and departed. Not a soul took the slightest notice of the whole transaction.
When the man had fairly gone, we three crossed the street and knocked at the door. It was immediately opened by Quincy Morris, besides whom stood Lord Godumring lighting a cigar.
The place smelled so vilely, said the latter as we walked in. It did indeed smell vilely, like the old chapel at Carfax, and with our previous experience it was plain to us that the Count had been using the place pretty freely.
We moved to explore the house, all keeping together in case of attack, for we knew we had a strong and wily enemy to deal with, and as yet we did not know whether the Count might not be in the house.
In the dining-room, which lay at the back of the hall, we found eight boxes of earth. Eight boxes only, out of the nine which we sought. Our work was not over, and would never be until we had found the missing box.
First we opened the shutters of a window, which looked out across a narrow stone-flagged yard at the blank face of a stable, pointed to look like the front of a miniature house. There were no windows in it, so we were not afraid of being overlooked.
We did not lose any time in examining the chests. With the tools which we had brought with us, we opened them one by one, and treated them as we had treated those others in the old chapel. It was evident to us that the Count was not at present in the house, and we proceeded to search for any of his effects.
After a curse-free glance at the rest of the rooms, from basement to attic, we came to the conclusion that the dining-room contained any effects which might belong to the Count, and so we proceeded to minutely examine them.
They lay in a sort of orderly disorder on the great dining-room table. There were title deeds of the Piccadilly House in a great bundle, deeds of the purchase of the houses at Miles End and Bermondsey, note-paper envelopes and pens and ink, all were covered up in a thin wrapping paper to keep them from the dust.
There was also a clothes-brush, a brush and comb, and a jug and basin, the latter containing dirty water which was ridden, as if with blood. Last of all was a little heap of keys of all sorts and sizes, probably those belonging to the other houses.
When we had examined this last find, Lord Godelming and Quincy Morris, taking accurate notes of the various addresses of the houses in the East and South, took with them the keys in a great bunch and set out to destroy the boxes in these places.
The rest of us are, with what patience we can, waiting their return, or the coming of the Count.
October 3.
The time seemed terribly long whilst we were waiting for the coming of our Gottemling and
Quincy Morris.
The professor tried to keep our minds active by using them all the time.
I could see his beneficent purpose by the side glances which he threw from time to time
at Harker.
The poor fellow was overwhelmed in a misery that is appalling to see.
Last night he was a frank, happy-looking man with a strong, youthful face, full of energy
and with dark brown hair.
Today he is a drawn, haggard old man, whose white hair matches well with the hollow burning
eyes and grief-written lines of his face.
His energy is still intact.
In fact, he is like a living flame.
This may yet be his salvation, for if all go well, it will tide him over the despairing
period.
He will then, in a kind of way, wake again to the realities of life.
Poor fellow!
I thought my own trouble was bad enough, but his...
The professor knows this well enough, and is doing his best to keep his mind active.
What he has been saying was, under the circumstances of absorbing interest.
So well as I can remember, here it is.
I have studied, over and over again since they came into my hands, all the papers relating
to this monster, and the more I have studied, the greater seems the necessity to utterly
stamp him out.
All through there are signs of his advance, not only of his power, but of his knowledge
of it.
As I learned from the researches of my friend Armanus of Budapest, he was in life a most
wonderful man, soldier, statesman, and alchemist, which latter was the highest development of
science knowledge of his time.
He had a mighty brain, a learning beyond compare, and a heart that knew no fear and no remorse.
He dared even to attend the Schlossmanns, and there was no branch of knowledge of his
time that he did not assay.
Well, in him the brain-power survived the physical death, though it would seem that
memory was not all complete.
In some faculties of mind he has, and is, only a child.
But he is growing, and some things that were childish at the first are now of man's stature.
He is experimenting, and doing it well.
And if it had not been that we had crossed his path, he would be yet—he may be yet
if we fail—the father or furtherer of a new life of beings, whose road must lead through
death, not life.
Harker groaned and said, And this is all a raid against my darling, but how is he experimenting?
The knowledge may help us to defeat him.
He has all along, since his coming, been trying his power, slowly but surely.
That big child-brain of his is working.
Well for us it is as yet a child-brain.
For had he dared, at the first, to attempt certain things, he would long ago have been
beyond our power.
However, he means to succeed, and a man who has centuries before him can afford to wait
and go slow.
Festina lente may well be his motto.
I fail to understand, said Harker wearily.
Oh, do be more plain to me.
Perhaps grief and trouble are dulling my brain.
The professor laid his hand tenderly on his shoulder as he spoke.
Ah, my child, I will be plain.
Do you not see how, of late, this monster has been creeping into knowledge experimentally?
He has been making use of the Zophagous patient to affect his entry into friend John's home.
For your vampire, though in all afterwards he can come how and when he will, must at
the first make entry only when asked thereto by an inmate.
But these are not his most important experiments.
Do we not see how at the first all these great boxes were moved by others?
He knew not then, but that must be so.
But all the time that so great child-brain of his was growing, and he began to consider
whether he might not himself move the box, so he began to try to help, and then, when
he found that this be all right, he tried to move them all alone, and so he progress,
and he scattered these graves of him, and none but he know where they are hidden.
He may have intended to bury them deep in the ground, so that only he may use them in
the night, or at such time as he can change his form.
They do him equal well, and none may know these are his hiding-place, but my child do
not despair, this knowledge came to him just too late.
Already all of his lairs but one be sterilized as for him, and before the sunset this shall
be so.
Then he have no place where he can move and hide.
I delayed this morning, so that we might be sure.
Is there not more at stake for us than for him?
Then why not be more careful than him?
By my clock it is one hour already, and, if all be well, our friend Arthur and Quincy
are on their way to us.
Today is our day, and we must go sure, if slow, and lose no chance.
See, there are five of us when those absent ones return.
Whilst we were speaking we were startled by a knock at the hall door, the double postman's
knock of the telegraph boy.
We all moved out to the hall with one impulse, and Van Helsing, holding up his hand to us
to keep silence, stepped to the door and opened it.
The boy handed in a dispatch.
The professor closed the door again, and after looking at the direction opened it and read
Look out for Dee.
He has just now, twelve forty-five, come from Carfax hurriedly and hasten towards the south.
He seems to be going the round and may want to see you, Mina."
There was a pause, broken by Jonathan Harker's voice.
Now, God be thanked, we shall soon meet.
Van Helsing turned to him quickly and said, God will act in his own way and time.
Do not fear and do not rejoice as yet, for what we wish for at the moment may be our
own undoings.
I care for nothing now, he answered hotly, except to wipe out this brute from the face
of creation.
I would sell my soul to do it.
O, hush, hush, my child, said Van Helsing.
God does not purchase souls in this wise, and the devil, though he may purchase, does
not keep faith.
But God is merciful and just, and knows your pain and your devotion to that dear Madam
Mina.
Think you how her pain would be doubled did she but hear your wild words.
Do not fear any of us.
We are all devoted to this cause, and to-day shall see the end.
The time is coming for action.
To-day this vampire is limit to the powers of man.
Until sunset he may not change.
It will take him time yet to arrive here.
See it is twenty minutes past one, and there are yet some times before he can hither come,
be he ever so quick.
What we must hope for is that my Lord Arthur and Quincy arrive first.
About half an hour after we received Mrs. Harker's telegram there came a quiet, resolute
knock at the hall door.
It was just an ordinary knock, such as is given hourly by thousands of gentlemen, but
it made the Professor's heart and mind beat loudly.
We looked at each other, and together moved out into the hall.
We each held ready to use our various armaments, the spiritual in the left hand, the mortal
in the right.
Van Helsing pulled back the latch, and holding the door half open, stood back, having both
hands ready for action.
The gladness of our hearts must have shone upon our faces, when on the step, close to
the door, we saw Lord Gadamaling and Quincy Morris.
They came in quickly and closed the door behind them, the former saying, as they moved along
the hall.
It is all right.
We found both places, six boxes in each, and we destroyed them all.
Destroyed?
asked the Professor.
For him?
We were silent for a minute.
And then Quincy said, There's nothing to do but wait here.
If, however, he doesn't turn up by five o'clock, we must start off, for it won't do to leave
Mrs. Harker alone after sunset.
He will be here before long now, said Van Helsing, who had been consulting his pocketbook.
Not to bene, in Madame's telegram he went south from Carfax.
That means he went to cross the river, and he could only do so at slack of tide, which
should be something before one o'clock.
That he went south has a meaning for us.
He is as yet only suspicious, and he went from Carfax first to the place where he would
suspect interference leased.
You must have been at Bermondsey only a short time before him.
That he is not here already shows that he went to Mile End next.
This took him some time, for he would then have to be carried over the river in some
way.
Believe me, my friends, we shall not have long to wait now.
We should have ready some plan of attack, so that we may throw away no chance.
Hush, there is no time now.
Have all your arms.
Be ready.
He held up a warning hand as he spoke, for we all could hear a key softly inserted into
the lock of the hall door.
I could not but admire, even at such a moment, the way in which a dominant spirit asserts
itself.
In all our hunting parties and adventures in different parts of the world, Quincy Morris
had always been the one to arrange the plan of action, and Arthur and I seemed to be accustomed
to obey him implicitly.
Now the old habits seemed to be renewed instinctively.
With a swift glance round the room he at once laid out our plan of attack, and without speaking
a word with a gesture placed each of us in position.
Then Helsing, Harker, and I were just behind the door, so that when it opened the Professor
could guard it whilst we two stepped between the intercomer and the door.
Gottemling behind and Quincy in front stood just out of sight, ready to move in front
of the window.
We waited in a suspense that made the seconds pass with nightmare slowness.
The slow, careful steps came along the hall.
The Count was evidently prepared for some surprise.
At least he feared it.
Suddenly with a single bound he leapt into the room.
Winning away past us before any of us could raise a hand to stay him.
There was something so panther-like in the movement, something so unhuman, that it seemed
to sober us all from the shock of his coming.
The first to act was Harker, who with a quick movement threw himself before the door leading
into the room in front of the house.
As the Count saw us a horrible sort of snarl passed over his face, showing the eye-tooth
long and pointed, but the evil smile is quickly passed into a cold stare of lion-like disdain.
His expression again changed, as, with a single impulse, we all advanced upon him.
It was a pity that we had not some better yet organized plan of attack, for even at
the moment I wondered what we were to do.
I did not myself know whether our lethal weapons would avail of us anything.
Harker evidently meant to try the matter, for he had ready his great Kukuri-knife and
made a fierce and sudden cut at him.
The blow was a powerful one, only the diabolical quickness of the Count's leap back saved him.
A second less, and the trenchant blade had shorn through his heart.
As it was, the point just cut the cloth of his coat, making a wide gap whence a bundle
of bank-notes and stream of gold fell out.
The expression of the Count's face was so hellish that for a moment I feared for Harker,
though I saw him throw the terrible knife aloft again for another stroke.
Instinctively I moved forward with a protective impulse, holding the crucifix and wafer in
my left hand.
I felt a mighty power fly along my arm, and it was without surprise that I saw the monster
cower back before a similar movement made spontaneously by each one of us.
It would be impossible to describe the expression of hate and baffled malignity, of anger and
hellish rage which came over the Count's face.
His waxen hue became greenish-yellow by the contrast of his burning eyes, and the red
scar on the forehead showed on the pallid skin like a palpitating wound.
The next instant, with a sinuous dive, he swept under Harker's arm ere his blow could
fall and, grasping a handful of the money from the floor, dashed across the room, threw
himself at the window.
Amid the crash and glitter of the falling glass he tumbled into the flagged area below.
Through the sound of the shivering glass I could hear the ting of the gold as some of
the sovereigns fell on the flagging.
We ran over and saw him spring, unhurt from the ground.
He, rushing up the stairs, crossed the flagged yard and pushed open the stable door.
There he turned and spoke to us.
You think to baffle me, you with your pale faces all in a row, like sheep in a butcher's.
You shall be sorry yet, each one of you.
You think that you have left me without place to rest, but I have more.
My revenge has just begun.
I spread it over centuries, and time is on my side.
Your girls that you all love are mine already, and through them you and others shall yet
be mine, my creatures, to do my bidding and be my jackals when I want to feed.
Bah!
With a contemptuous sneer he passed quickly through the door, and we heard the rusty bolt
creak as he fastened it behind him.
A door beyond opened and shut.
The first of us to speak was the professor.
Realizing the difficulty of following him through the stable we moved towards the hall.
We have learned something, much.
Notwithstanding his brave words he fears us.
He fears time.
He fears want.
For if not, why hurry so?
His very tone betray him, or my ears deceive.
Why take that money?
You follow quick.
You are hunters of the wild beast, and understand it so.
For me I make sure that nothing here may be of use to him, if so that he returns.
As he spoke he put the money remaining in his pocket, took the title deeds in the bundle
as Harker had left them, and swept the remaining things into the open fireplace where he set
fire to them with a match.
Godemling and Morris rushed out into the yard, and Harker lowered himself from the window
to follow the count.
He had, however, bolted the stable door, and by the time they had forced it open there
was no sign of him.
Van Helsing and I tried to make inquiry at the back of the house, but the muse was deserted
and no one had seen him depart.
It was now late in the afternoon, and sunset was not far off.
We had to recognize that our game was up.
With heavy hearts we agreed with the professor when he said,
Let us go back now to Madame Mina.
Poor, poor dear Madame Mina.
All we can do just now is done, and we can there at least protect her.
But we need not despair.
There is but one more earth box, and we must try to find it.
When that is done all may yet be well.
I could see that he spoke as bravely as he could to comfort Harker.
The poor fellow was quite broken down.
Now and again he gave a low groan which he could not suppress.
He was thinking of his wife.
With sad hearts we came back to my house where we found Mrs. Harker waiting us,
with an appearance of cheerfulness which did honor to her bravery and unselfishness.
When she saw our faces her own became as pale as death.
For a second or two her eyes were closed as if she were in secret prayer,
and then she said cheerfully,
I can never thank you all enough, oh my poor darling.
As she spoke she took her husband's gray head in her hands and kissed it.
May your poor head hear and rest it.
All will be well, dear.
God will protect us if he so will it in his good intent.
The poor fellow groaned.
There was no place for words in his sublime misery.
We had a sort of perfunctory supper together,
and I think it cheered us all up somewhat.
It was perhaps the mere animal heat of food to hungry people,
for none of us had eaten anything since before breakfast,
or the sense of companionship may have helped us.
But anyhow we were all less miserable,
and we saw the morrow was not altogether without hope.
True to our promise we told Mrs. Harker everything which had passed,
and although she grew snowy white at times
when danger had seemed to threaten her husband,
and read at others when his devotion to her was manifested,
she listened bravely and without comment.
When we came to the part where Harker had rushed at the council recklessly,
she clung to her husband's arm and held it tight
as though her clinging could protect him from any harm that might come.
She said nothing, however, till the narration was all done,
and matters had been brought up to the present time.
Then, without letting go her husband's hand,
she stood up amongst us and spoke.
Oh, that I could give any idea of the scene,
of that sweet, sweet, good, good woman
and all the radiant beauty of her youth and animation,
with the red scar on her forehead, of which she was conscious,
and which we saw with grinding of our teeth,
remembering whence and how it came,
her loving kindness against our grim hate,
her tender faith against all our fears and doubting,
and we, knowing that so far as symbols went,
she, with all her goodness and purity and faith,
was outcast from God.
Jonathan, she said, and the word sounded like music on her lips,
it was so full of love and tenderness.
Jonathan dear, and you all my true, true friends,
I want you to bear something in mind through all this dreadful time.
I know that you must fight, that you must destroy,
even as you destroyed the false Lucy,
so that the true Lucy might live hereafter,
but it is not a work of hate.
That poor soul who has wrought all this misery
is the saddest case of all.
Just think what will be his joy when he too is destroyed
in his worser part, that his better part
may have spiritual immortality.
You must be pitiful to him too,
though it may not hold your hands from his destruction.
As she spoke, I could see her husband's face darken
and draw together, as though the passion in him
were shriveling his being to its core,
instinctively the clasp on his wife's hand grew closer,
till his knuckles looked white.
She did not flinch from the pain
which I knew she must have suffered,
but looked at him with eyes that were more appealing than ever.
As she stopped speaking, he leapt to his feet,
almost tearing his hand from hers as he spoke.
May God give him into my hand just for long enough
to destroy that earthly life of him which we are aiming at.
If beyond it I could send his soul forever
and never to burning hell, I would do it.
Oh hush, oh hush in the name of good God.
Don't say such things, Jonathan, my husband,
or you will crush me with fear and horror.
Just think, my dear, I have been thinking all this long, long day of it,
that perhaps some day I too may need such pity,
and that some other like you,
and with equal cause for anger, may deny it me.
Oh my husband, my husband indeed,
I would pray have spared you such a thought had there been another way,
but I pray that God may not have treasured your wild words
except as the heartbroken wail of a very loving and sorely stricken man.
Oh God, let these poor white hairs go in evidence of what he has suffered,
who all his life has done no wrong and on whom so many sorrows have come.
We men all were in tears now, there was no resisting them, and we wept openly.
She wept too, to see that her sweeter counsels had prevailed.
Her husband flung himself on his knees beside her,
and putting his arms round her hid his face in the folds of her dress.
Van Helsing beckoned to us, and we stole out of the room.
Leaving the two loving hearts alone with their God.
Before they retired, the professor fixed up the room against any coming of the vampire,
and assured Mrs. Harker that she might rest in peace.
She tried to school herself to the belief,
and manifestly for her husband's sake tried to seem content.
It was a brave struggle, and was, I think and believe, not without its reward.
Van Helsing had placed at hand a bell,
which either of them was to sound in case of any emergency.
When they had retired, Quincy, Gautamling, and I arranged that we should sit up,
dividing the night between us, and watch over the safety of the poor stricken lady.
The first watch falls to Quincy, so the rest of us shall be off to bed as soon as we can.
Gautamling has already turned in, for his is the second watch.
Now that my work is done, I too shall go to bed.
Jonathan Harker's Journal 3-4 October, close to midnight.
I thought yesterday would never end.
There was over me a yearning for sleep, and some sort of blind belief
that to wake would be to find things changed,
that any change must now be for the better.
Before we parted, we discussed what our next step was to be,
but we could arrive at no result.
All we knew was that there was one earth box remaining,
and that the Count alone knew where it was.
If he chooses to lie hidden, he may baffle us for years.
And in the meantime, the thought is too horrible, I dare not think of it even now.
This I know, that if ever there was a woman who was all perfection,
that one is my poor wronged darling.
I loved her a thousand times more for her sweet pity of last night,
a pity that made my own hate of the monster seem despicable.
Surely God will not permit the world to be the poorer by the loss of such a creature.
This is a hope to me.
We are all drifting reefwards now, and faith is our only anchor.
Thank God!
Mina is sleeping, and sleeping without dreams.
I fear what her dreams must be like, with such terrible memories to ground them in.
She has not been so calm within my seeing since the sunset.
Then, for a while, there came over her face a repose which was like
the spring after the blasts of March.
I thought at the time that it was the softness of the red sunset on her face,
but somehow now I think it has a deeper meaning.
I am not sleepy myself, though I am weary, weary to death.
However, I must try to sleep, for there is tomorrow to think of,
and there is no rest for me until later.
I must have fallen asleep, for I was awakened by Mina,
who was sitting up in bed with a startled look on her face.
I could see easily, for we did not leave the room in darkness.
She had placed a warning hand over my mouth, and now she whispered in my ear,
Hush, there is someone in the corridor.
I got up softly, and crossing the room gently opened the door.
Just outside, stretched on a mattress, lay Mr. Morris wide awake.
He raised a warning hand for silence as he whispered to me,
Hush, go back to bed.
All is all right.
One of us will be here all night.
We don't mean to take any chances.
His look and gesture forbade discussion, so I came back and told Mina.
She sighed and positively, a shadow of a smile stole over her poor pale face,
and she put her arms round me and said softly,
Oh, thank God for good brave men.
With a sigh she sank back again into sleep.
I write this now, as I am not sleepy, though I must try again.
4 October Morning
Once again during the night I was wakened by Mina.
This time we had all had a good sleep,
for the gray of the coming dawn was making the windows into sharp oblongs,
and the gas flame was like a speck rather than a disk of light.
She said to me hurriedly,
Go, call the professor, I want to see him at once.
Why, I asked.
I have an idea.
I suppose it must have come in the night, and matured without my knowing it.
He must hypnotize me before the dawn, and then I shall be able to speak.
Go quick, dearest, the time is getting close.
I went to the door.
Dr. Seward was resting on the mattress, and seeing me he sprang to his feet.
Is anything wrong?
He asked an alarm.
No, I replied, but Mina wants to see Dr. Van Helsing at once.
I will go, he said, and hurried into the professor's room.
Two or three minutes later Van Helsing was in the room in his dressing gown,
and Mr. Morris and Lord Gadamling were there with Dr. Seward at the door asking questions.
When the professor saw Mina, a smile, a positive smile,
ousted the anxiety off his face.
He rubbed his hands as he said,
Oh, my dear Madam Mina, this is indeed a change.
See, friend Jonathan, we have got our dear Madam Mina as old back to us today.
Then turning to her, he said cheerfully,
And what am I to do for you?
For at this hour you do not want me for nothing.
I want you to hypnotize me, she said.
Do it before the dawn, for I feel that that is when I can speak, and speak freely.
Be quick, for time is short.
Without a word he motioned for her to sit up in bed.
Looking fixedly at her, he commenced to make passes in front of her,
from over the top of her head downward, with each hand in turn.
Mina gazed at him fixedly for a few minutes,
during which my own heart beat like a trip hammer,
for I felt that some crisis was at hand.
Gradually her eyes closed, and she sat, stock still.
Only by the gentle heaving of her bosom could one know that she was alive.
The professor made a few more passes and then stopped,
and I could see that his forehead was covered with great beads of perspiration.
Mina opened her eyes, but she did not seem the same woman.
There was a faraway look in her eyes,
and her voice had a sad dreaminess which was new to me.
Raising his hand to impose silence, the professor motioned to me to bring the others in.
They came on tiptoe, closing the door behind them,
and stood at the foot of the bed looking on.
Mina appeared not to see them.
This stillness was broken by Vran Helsing's voice speaking in a low level tone,
which would not break the current of her thoughts.
Where are you?
The answer came in a neutral way.
I do not know.
Sleep has no place, I can call its own.
For several minutes there was silence.
Mina sat rigid, and the professor stood staring at her fixedly.
The rest of us hardly dared to breathe.
The room was growing lighter.
Without taking his eyes from Mina's face,
Dr. Vran Helsing motioned to me to pull up the blind.
I did so, and the day seemed just upon us.
A red streak shot up, and a rosy light seemed to diffuse itself through the room.
On the instant the professor spoke again.
Where are you now?
The answer came dreamily, but with intention.
There were as though she were interpreting something.
I have heard her use the same tone when reading her short hints notes.
I do not know.
It is all strange to me.
What do you see?
I can see nothing.
It is all dark.
What do you hear?
I could detect the strain in the professor's patient voice.
The lapping of water.
It is gurgling by, and little waves leap.
I can hear them on the outside.
Then you are on a ship.
We all looked at each other, trying to glean something each from the other.
We were afraid to think.
The answer came quick.
Oh, yes.
What else do you hear?
The sound of men stamping overhead as they run about.
There is the creaking of a chain, and the loud tinkle as
the check of the cap scan falls into the ratchet.
What are you doing?
I am still low still.
It is like death.
The voice faded away into the deep breath as of one sleeping,
and the open eyes closed again.
By this time the sun had risen, and we were all in the full light of day.
Dr. Van Helsing placed his hands on Mina's shoulders,
and laid her head down softly on her pillow.
She lay like a sleeping child for a few moments,
and then, with a long sigh, awoke and stared in wonder to see us all around her.
Have I been talking in my sleep, was all she said.
She seemed, however, to know the situation without telling,
though she was eager to know what she had told.
The professor repeated the conversation, and she said,
Then there is not a moment to lose.
It may not yet be too late.
Mr. Morris and Lord Gottemling started for the door,
but the professor's calm voice called them back.
Stay, my friends.
That ship, wherever it is, was weighing anchor at the moment
in your so great port of London.
Which of them is it that you seek?
God be thanked that we once again have a clue,
though somewhat wither that may lead us to know not.
We have been blind somewhat, blind after the matter of men.
Since we can look back and see what we might have seen looking forward,
if we had been able to see what we might have seen.
Alas, that sentence is a puzzle, is it not?
We cannot know what was in the Count's mind when he seized that money,
though Jonathan's so fierce knife put him in danger that even he dread.
He meant escape.
Hear me, escape.
He saw that, but with one earth-box left,
and a pack of men following like dogs after a fox,
this London was no place for him.
He have take his last earth-box on board a ship, and he leave the land.
He think to escape, but no.
We follow him.
Tally-ho, as friend Arthur would say when he put on his red frock,
to our old foxes wily.
Oh, so wily, and we must follow with wile.
I too am wily, and I think his mind in a little while.
In mean time we may rest in peace, for there are between us
which he do not want to pass, and which he could not if he would,
unless the ship were to touch the land, and then only at full or slack tide.
See, and the sun is just rose, and all day to sunset it is.
Let us take bath and dress and breakfast which we all need,
and which we can eat comfortably since he has not been in the same land with us.
Mina looked at him appealingly as she said,
but why need we seek him further when he is gone from us?
He took her hand and patted it as he replied,
Ask me nothing yet.
When we have had breakfast, then I answer all questions.
He would say no more, and we separated to dress.
After breakfast, Mina repeated her question.
He looked at her gravely for a minute, and then said sorrowfully,
Because, my dear, dear Madame Mina, now more than ever we must find him,
even if we have to follow him to the jaws of hell.
She grew paler as she said faintly,
Why? Because, he answered solemnly,
He can live for centuries, and you are but a mortal woman.
Time is now to be dreaded, since once he put that mark upon your throat.
I was just in time to catch her as she fell forward in a faint.
Dr. Seward's Phonograph Diary. Spoken by Van Helsing.
This to Jonathan Harker.
You are to stay with your dear Madame Mina. We shall go to make our search, if I can call
it so, for it is not search but knowing, and we seek confirmation only. But do you stay
and take care of her to-day? This is your best and most holiest office. This day nothing
can find him here. Let me tell you so that you will know what we four know already, for
I have tell them. He, our enemy, have gone away. He have gone back to his castle in Transylvania.
I know it so well as if a great hand of fire wrote it on the wall. He have prepare for
this in some way, and that last earth box was ready to ship somewheres. For this he
must hurry at the last, lest we catch him before the sun go down. It was his last hope,
save that he might hide in the tomb, that he think poor Miss Lucy, being as he thought
like him, keep open to him. But there was not of time. When that fail he makes straight
for his last resource, his last earth work, I might say, did I wish double entente. He
is clever, oh so clever. He know that his game here was finish, and so he decide he
go back home. He find ship going by the route he came, and he go in it. We go off now to
find what ship and whither bound. When we have discover that, we come back and tell
you all. Then we will comfort you and poor Madam Mina with new hope. For it will be hope
when you think it over that all is not lost. This very creature that we pursue, he take
hundreds of years to get so far as London, and yet in one day, when we know of the disposal
of him, we drive him out. He is finite, though he is powerful to do much harm, and suffers
not as we do. But we are strong, each in our purpose, and we are all more strong together.
Take heart afresh, dear husband of Madam Mina. This battle is but begun, and in the end we
shall win. So sure as that God sits on high to watch over his children. Therefore be of
much comfort till we return.
Van Helsing
Jonathan Harker's Journal
Fourth of October
When I read to Mina Van Helsing's message in the phonograph, the poor girl brightened
up considerably. Already the certainty that the Count is out of the country has given
her comfort. And comfort is strength to her. For my own part, now that his horrible danger
is not face to face with us, it seems almost impossible to believe in it. Even my own terrible
experiences in Castle Dracula seem like a long-forgotten dream, here in the crisp autumn
air in the bright sunlight. Alas, how can I disbelieve? In the midst of my thought my
eye fell on the red scar on my poor darling's white forehead. Whilst that lasts there can
be no disbelief. Mina and I fear to be idle, so we have been over all the diaries again
and again. Somehow, although the realities seem greater each time, the pain and the fear
seem less. There is something of a guiding purpose manifest throughout which is comforting.
Mina says that perhaps we are the instruments of ultimate good. It may be. I shall try to
think as she does. We have never spoken to each other yet of the future. It is better
to wait till we see the Professor and the others, after their investigations. The day
is running by more quickly than I ever thought a day could run for me again. It is now three
o'clock.
Mina Harker's Journal. 5th October. 5 p.m. Our meeting for report. Present. Professor
Van Helsing. Lord Godalming. Dr. Seward. Mr. Quincy Morris. Jonathan Harker. Mina Harker.
Van Helsing described what steps were taken during the day to discover on what boat and
whither bound Count Dracula made his escape. As I knew that he wanted to get back to Transylvania,
I felt sure that he must go by the Danube mouth, or by somewhere in the Black Sea, since
by that way he come. It was a dreary blank that was before us. Omne ignotum pro magnifico,
and so with heavy hearts we start to find what ships leave for the Black Sea last night.
He was in sailing ship, since Madame Mina tell of sails being set. These not so important
as to go in your list of the shipping in the times, and so we go, by suggestion of
Lord Godalming, to your Lloyds, where are note of all ships that sail however so small.
There we find that only one Black Sea bound ship go out with the tide. She is the Tsarina
Catherine, and she sail from Doolittle's Wharf for Varna, and thence to other ports and up
the Danube.
So, said I, this is the ship whereon is the Count. So off we go to Doolittle's Wharf,
and there we find a man in an office. From him we inquire of the goings of the Tsarina
Catherine. He swear much, and he red face and loud of voice, but he good fellow all
the same. And when Quincy give him something from his pocket which crackle as he roll it
up, and put it in a so small bag which he have hid deep in his clothing, he still better
fellow and humble servant to us. He come with us, and ask many men who are rough and hot.
These be better fellows too, when they have been no more thirsty. They say much of blood
and bloom, and of others which I comprehend not, though I guess what they mean. But nevertheless
they tell us all things which we want to know.
They make known to us among them how last afternoon at about five o'clock comes a man
so hurry, a tall man, thin and pale, with high nose and teeth so white, and eyes that
seem to be burning. That he be all in black, except that he have a hat of straw which suit
not him or the time. That he scatter his money in making quick inquiry as to what ship sails
for the Black Sea and for where. Some took him to the office and then to the ship, where
he will not go aboard but halt at shore end of Gangplank, and ask that the captain come
to him. The captain come when told that he will be pay well, and though he swear much,
at the first he agree to term. Then the thin man go, and some one tell him where horse
and cart can be hired. He go there, and soon he come again, himself driving cart on which
a great box. This he himself lift down, though it takes several to put it on truck for the
ship. He give much talk to captain as to how and where his box is to be place. But the
captain like it not, and swear at him in many tongues, and tell him that if he like he can
come and see where it shall be. But he say no, that he come not yet, for that he have
much to do. Whereupon the captain tell him that he had better be quick, with blood, for
that his ship will leave the place, of blood, before the turn of the tide, with blood. Then
the thin man smile, and say that of course he must go when he think fit, but he will
be surprised if he go quite so soon. The captain swear again, polyglot, and the thin man make
him bow, and thank him, and say that he will so far intrude on his kindness as to come
aboard before the sailing. Final the captain, more red than ever, and in more tongues, tell
him that he doesn't want no Frenchmen, with bloom upon them, and also with blood, in his
ship, with blood on her also. And so, after asking where he might purchase ship-forms,
he departed. No one knew where he went, or bloomin' well cared, as they said, for they
had something else to think of, well with blood again. For it soon became apparent to
all that the Tsarina Catherine would not sail as was expected. A thin mist began to creep
up from the river, and it grew, and grew, till soon a dense fog enveloped the ship,
and all around her. The captain swore polyglot, very polyglot, polyglot with bloom and blood,
but he could do nothing. The water rose and rose, and he began to fear that he would lose
the tide altogether. He was in no friendly mood when, just at full tide, the thin man
came up the gangplank again, and asked to see where his box had been stowed. Then the
captain replied that he wished he and his box, old and with much bloom and blood, were
in hell. But the thin man did not be offend, and went down with the mate, and saw where
it was place, and came up, and stood awhile on deck in fog. He must have come off by himself,
for none notice him. Indeed they thought not of him, for soon the fog began to melt away,
and all was clear again. My friends of the thirst and the language that was of bloom
and blood laughed, as they told how the captain's swears exceeded even his usual polyglot, and
was more than ever full of picturesque, when on questioning other mariners who were on
movement up and down the river that hour, he found that few of them had seen any of
fog at all, except where it lay round the wharf. However, the ship went outs on the
ebb tide, and was doubtless by morning far down the river mouth. She was then, when they
told us, well out to sea. And so, my dear Madame Mina, it is that we have to rest for
time, for our enemy is on the sea, with the fog at his command, on his way to the Danube
mouth. To sail a ship takes time, goes she never so quick. And when we start to go on
land more quick, and we meet him there, our best hope is to come on him when in the box
between sunrise and sunset, for then he can make no struggle, and we may deal with him
as we should. There are days for us in which we can make ready our plan. We know all about
where he go, for we have seen the owner of the ship, who have shown us invoices and all
papers that can be. The box we seek is to be landed in Varna, and to be given to an
agent, one Ristics, who will there present his credentials. And so our merchant friend
will have done his part. When he ask if there be any wrong, for that so he can telegraph
and have inquiry made at Varna, we say no, for what is to be done is not for police or
of the customs. It must be done by us alone, and in our own way. When Dr. Van Helsing had
done speaking, I asked him if he were certain that the Count had remained on board the ship.
He replied, We have the best proof of that, your own evidence, when in the hypnotic trance
this morning. I asked him again if it were really necessary that they should pursue the
Count, for, oh, I dread Jonathan leaving me, and I know that he would surely go if the
others went. He answered in growing passion, at first quietly. As he went on, however,
he grew more angry and more forceful, till in the end we could not but see wherein was
at least some of that personal dominance which made him so long a master amongst men.
Yes, it is necessary, necessary, necessary, for your sake in the first, and then for the
sake of humanity. This monster has done much harm already, in the narrow scope where he
had found himself, and in the short time when as yet he was only as a body groping
his so small measure in darkness, and not knowing. All this have I told these others.
You, my dear Madame Mina, will learn it in the phonograph of my friend John, or in that
of your husband. I have told them how the measure of leaving his own barren land, barren
of peoples, and coming to a new land where life of man teems till they are like the multitude
of standing corn, was the work of centuries. Were another of the undead, like him, to try
to do what he has done, perhaps not all the centuries of the world that have been or that
will be could aid him. With this one all the forces of nature that are occult and deep
and strong must have worked together in some wondrous way. The very place where he have
been alive, undead for all these centuries, is full of strangeness of the geologic and
chemical world. There are deep caverns and fissures that reach none know whither. There
have been volcanoes, some of whose openings still send out waters of strange properties,
and gases that kill or make to vivify. Doubtless there is something magnetic or electric in
some of these combinations of occult forces which work for physical life in strange way,
and in himself were from the first some great qualities. In a hard and warlike time he was
celebrate that he have more iron nerve, more subtle brain, more braver heart than any man.
In him some vital principle have in strange way found their utmost, and as his body keeps
strong and grow and thrive, so his brain grow too. All this without that diabolic aid which
is surely to him, for it have to yield to the powers that come from and are symbolic
of good, and now this is what he is to us. He have infect you, oh forgive me, my dear,
that I must say such, but it is for good of you that I speak. He infect you in such wise,
that even if he do know more, you have only to live, to live in your own old sweet way,
and so in time death, which is of man's common lot, and with God's sanction, shall make you
like to him. This must not be. We have sworn together that it must not. Thus we are ministers
of God's own wish, that the world, and men for whom his son die, will not be given over
to monsters whose very existence would defame him. He have allowed us to redeem one soul
already, and we go out as the old knights of the cross to redeem more. Like them we
shall travel towards the sunrise, and like them, if we fall, we fall in good cause.
He paused, and I said, But will not the count take his rib off wisely? Since he has been
driven from England, will he not avoid it, as a tiger does the village from which he
has been hunted?
Aha, he said, your simile of the tiger good for me, and I shall adopt him. Your man-eater,
as they of India call the tiger, who has once tasted blood of the human, care no more for
the other prey, but prowl unceasing till he get him. This that we hunt from our village
is a tiger too, a man-eater, and he never cease to prowl. Nay, in himself he is not
one to retire and stay afar. In his life, his living life, he go over the turkey frontier,
and attack his enemy on his own ground. He be beaten back, but did he stay? No. He come
again and again and again. Look at his persistence and endurance. With the child brain that was
to him, he have long since conceive the idea of coming to a great city. What does he do?
He find out the place of all the world most of promise for him. Then he deliberately set
himself down to prepare for the task. He find in patience just how is his strength,
and what are his powers. He study new tongues. He learn new social life, new environment
of old ways, the politics, the law, the finance, the science, the habit of a new land, and
a new people who have come to be since he was. His glimpse that he have had, whet his
appetite only, and in keen his desire, nay, it help him to grow as to his brain. For it
all prove to him how right he was at the first in his surmises. He have done this alone,
all alone, from a ruined tomb in a forgotten land. What more may he not do when the greater
world of thought is open to him, he that can smile at death as we know him, who can flourish
in the midst of diseases that kill off whole peoples. Oh, if such an one was to come from
God and not the devil, what a force for good might he not be in this old world of ours.
But we are pledged to set the world free. Our toil must be in silence and our efforts
all in secret. For in this enlightened age, when men believe not even what they see, the
quoting of wise men would be his greatest strength. It would be at once his sheath and
his armour and his weapons to destroy us his enemies who are willing to peril even our
own souls for the safety of one we love, for the good of mankind and for the honour and
glory of God.
After a general discussion it was determined that for to-night nothing be definitely settled,
that we should all sleep on the facts and try to think out the proper conclusions. Tomorrow
at breakfast we are to meet again, and after making our conclusions known to one another
we shall decide on some definite cause of action.
I feel a wonderful peace and rest to-night. It is as if some haunting presence were removed
from me. Perhaps—
My surmise was not finished, could not be, for I caught sight in the mirror of the red
mark upon my forehead, and I knew that I was still unclean.
Dr. Seward's Diary. 5 October.
We all arose early, and I think that sleep did much for each and all of us. When we met
at early breakfast there was more general cheerfulness than any of us had ever expected
to experience again. It is really wonderful how much resilience there is in human nature.
Let any obstructing cause, no matter what, be removed in any way, even by death, and
we fly back to first principles of hope and enjoyment.
More than once as we sat around the table my eyes opened in wonder whether the whole
of the past days had not been a dream. It was only when I caught sight of the red blotch
on Mrs. Harker's forehead that I was brought back to reality. Even now, when I am gravely
revolving the matter, it is almost impossible to realize that the cause of all our trouble
is still existent.
Even Mrs. Harker seems to lose sight of her trouble for whole spells. It is only now and
again, when something recalls it to her mind, that she thinks of her terrible scar. We are
to meet here in my study in half an hour and decide on our course of action. I see only
one immediate difficulty. I know it by instinct rather than reason. We shall all have to speak
frankly, and yet I fear that in some mysterious way poor Mrs. Harker's tongue is tied. I know
that she forms conclusions of her own, and from all that has been I can guess how brilliant
and how true they must be, but she will not or cannot give them utterance. I have mentioned
this to Van Helsing, and he and I are to talk it over when we are alone. I suppose it is
some of that horrid poison which has got into her veins beginning to work. The Count had
his own purposes when he gave her what Van Helsing called the vampire's baptism of blood.
Well there may be a poison that distills itself out of good things. In an age when the existence
of tomains is a mystery we should not wonder at anything. One thing I know that if my instinct
be true regarding poor Mrs. Harker's silences, then there is a terrible difficulty and unknown
danger in the work before us. The same power that compels her silence may compel her speech.
I dare not think further, for so I showed in my thoughts dishonour a noble woman.
Later. When the Professor came in we talked over the state of things. I could see that
he had something on his mind which he wanted to say, but felt some hesitancy about broaching
the subject. After beating about the bush a little he said, Friend John, there is something
that you and I must talk of alone, just at the first, at any rate. Later we may have
to take the others into our confidence. Then he stopped, so I waited. He went on, Madam
Mina, our poor dear Madam Mina, is changing.
A cold shiver ran through me to find my worst fears thus endorsed. Van Helsing continued.
With the sad experience of Miss Lucy we must this time be warned before things go too far.
Our task is now in reality more difficult than ever, and this new trouble makes every
power of the direst importance. I can see the characteristics of the vampire coming
in her face. It is now but very, very slight, but it is to be seen if we have eyes to notice
without prejudge. Her teeth are sharper, and at times her eyes are more hard, but these
are not all. There is to her the silence now often, as so it was with Miss Lucy. She did
not speak, even when she wrote that which she wished to be known later. Now my fear
is this. If it be that she can, by our hypnotic trance, tell what the Count see and hear,
is it not more true that he who have hypnotized her first, and who have drink of her very
blood and make her drink of his, should, if he will, compel her mind to disclose to him
that which she know? I nodded acquiescence. He went on. Then what we must do is to prevent
this. We must keep her ignorant of our intent, and so she cannot tell what she know not.
This is a painful task. Oh, so painful that it heartbreak me to think of it, but it must
be. When to-day we meet, I must tell her that for reason which we will not to speak, she
must not more be of our counsel, but be simply guarded by us. He wiped his forehead, which
had broken out in profuse perspiration at the thought of the pain which he might have
to inflict upon the poor soul already so tortured. I knew that it would be some sort of comfort
to him if I told him that I also had come to the same conclusion, for at any rate it
would take away the pain of doubt. I told him, and the effect was as I expected. It
is now close to the time of our general gathering. Van Helsing has gone away to prepare for the
meeting and his painful part of it. I really believe his purpose is to be able to pray
alone. Later. At the very outset of our meeting a great personal relief was experienced by
both Van Helsing and myself. Mrs. Harker had sent a message by her husband to say that
she would not join us at present, as she thought it better that we should be free to discuss
our movements without her presence to embarrass us. The Professor and I looked at each other
for an instant, and somehow we both seemed relieved. For my own part, I thought that
if Mrs. Harker realized the danger herself, it was much pain as well as much danger averted.
Under the circumstances we agreed, by a questioning look and answer, with finger on lip, to preserve
silence in our suspicions until we should have been able to confer alone again. We went at
once into our plan of campaign. Van Helsing roughly put the facts before us. The Tsarina
Catherine left the Thames yesterday morning. It will take her at the quickest speed she
has ever made, at least three weeks to reach Varna. But we can travel overland to the same
place in three days. Now, if we allow for two days less for the ship's voyage, owing
to such weather influences as we know that the count can bring to bear, and if we allow
a whole day and night for any delays which may occur to us, then we have a margin of
nearly two weeks. Thus, in order to be quite safe, we must leave here on seventeenth at
latest. Then we shall at any rate be in Varna a day before the ship arrives, and able to
make such preparations as may be necessary. Of course, we shall all go armed, armed against
evil things, spiritual as well as physical. Here Quincey Morris added,—I understand
that the count comes from a wolf country, and it may be that he shall get there before
us. I propose that we add Winchesters to our armament. I have a kind of belief in a Winchester
when there is any trouble of that sort around. Do you remember, Art, when we had the pack
after us at Tobolsk? What wouldn't we have given then for a repeater apiece?
Good, said Van Helsing. Winchesters it shall be. Quincey's head is level at times, but
most so when there is to hunt. Metaphor be more dishonour to science than wolves be of
danger to man. In the meantime we can do nothing here, and as I think that Varna is not familiar
to any of us, why not go there more soon? It is as long to wait here as there. To-night
and to-morrow we can get ready, and then if all be well, we four can set out on our journey.
We four, said Harker, interrogatively, looking from one to another of us. Of course, answered
Harker. Harker was silent for a while, and then said in a hollow voice, Let us talk of
that part of it in the morning. I want to consult with Mina. I thought that now was
the time for Van Helsing to warn him not to disclose our plan to her, but he took no notice.
I looked at him significantly and coughed. For answer he put his finger to his lips and
turned away.
Jonathan Harker's Journal. 5th October. Afternoon.
For some time after our meeting this morning I could not think. The new phases of things
leave my mind in a state of wonder which allows no room for active thought. Mina's determination
not to take any part in the discussions set me thinking. And as I could not argue the
matter with her I could only guess. I am as far as ever from a solution now. The way the
others received it, too, puzzled me. The last time we talked of the subject we agreed that
there was to be no more concealment of anything amongst us. Mina is sleeping now, calmly and
sweetly, like a little child. Her lips are curved, and her face beams with happiness.
Thank God there are such moments still for her.
Later.
How strange it all is! I sat watching Mina's happy sleep, and I came as near to being happy
myself as I suppose I shall ever be. As the evening drew on, and the earth took its shadows
from the sun sinking lower, the silence of the room grew more and more solemn to me.
All at once Mina opened her eyes, and, looking at me tenderly, said,
Jonathan, I want you to promise me something on your word of honour. A promise made to
me, but made holily, in God's hearing, and not to be broken, though I should go down
my knees and implore you with bitter tears. Quick, you must make it to me at once.
Mina, I said, a promise like that I cannot make at once. I may have no right to make
it.
But dear one, she said, with such spiritual intensity that her eyes were like pole-stars.
It is I who wish it, and it is not for myself. You can ask Dr. Van Helsing if I am not right.
If he disagrees, you may do as you will. Nay, more if you all agree, later you are absolved
from the promise.
I promise, I said, and for a moment she looked supremely happy, though to me all happiness
for her was denied by the red scar on her forehead. She said,
Promise me that you will not tell me anything of the plans formed for the campaign against
the Count, not by word, or inference, or implication, not at any time, whilst this remains to me.
And she solemnly pointed to the scar. I saw that she was in earnest, and said solemnly,
I promise. And as I said it, I felt that from that instant a door had been shut between
us.
Later, midnight, Mina has been bright and cheerful all the evening, so much so that
all the rest seemed to take courage, as if infected somewhat with her gaiety. As a result,
even I myself felt as if the pall of gloom which weighs us down were somewhat lifted.
We all retired early. Mina is now sleeping like a little child. It is a wonderful thing
that her faculty of sleep remains to her in the midst of her terrible trouble. Thank God
for it, for then at least she can forget her care. Perhaps her example may affect me as
her gaiety did to-night. I shall try it. Oh, for a dreamless sleep!
Next of October, morning. Another surprise. Mina woke me early, about the same time as
yesterday, and asked me to bring Dr. Van Helsing. I thought that it was another occasion for
hypnotism, and without question went for the Professor. He had evidently expected some
such call, for I found him dressed in his room. His door was ajar, so that he could hear the
opening of the door of our room. He came at once. As he passed into the room, he asked
Mina if the others might come, too.
No, she said quite simply. It will not be necessary. You can tell them just as well.
I must go with you on your journey.
Dr. Van Helsing was as startled as I was. After a moment's pause he asked,
But why?
You must take me with you. I am safer with you, and you shall be safer, too.
But why, dear Madam Mina? You know that your safety is our solemnest duty. We go into danger,
to which you are, or may be, more liable than any of us from, from circumstances, things
that have been.
He paused, embarrassed. As she replied, she raised her finger and pointed to her forehead.
I know. That is why I must go. I can tell you now, whilst the sun is coming up, I may
not be able again. I know that when the Count wills me, I must go. I know that if he tells
me to come in secret, I must, by while, by any device to hoodwink, even Jonathan.
God saw the look that she turned on me as she spoke, and if there be indeed a recording
angel, that look is noted to her everlasting honour. I could only clasp her hand. I could
not speak. My emotion was too great for even the relief of tears.
She went on.
You men are brave and strong. You are strong in your numbers, for you can defy that which
would break down the human endurance of one who had to guard alone. Besides, I may be
of service, since you can hypnotise me, and so learn that which even I myself do not know.
Dr. Van Helsing said gravely,
Madam Mina, you are, as always, most wise. You shall with us come, and together we shall
do that which we go forth to achieve.
When he had spoken, Mina's long spell of silence made me look at her. She had fallen
back on her pillow asleep. She did not even wake when I had pulled up the blind and let
in the sunlight which flooded the room.
Van Helsing motioned to me to come with him quietly. We went to his room, and within a
minute Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, and Mr. Morris were with us also. He told them what
Mina had said, and went on.
In the morning we shall leave for Varna. We have now to deal with a new factor, Madam
Mina. Oh, but her soul is true. It is to her an agony to tell us so much as she has done.
But it is most right, and we are warned in time. There must be no chance lost, and in
Varna we must be ready to act the instant when that ship arrives.
What shall we do exactly? asked Mr. Morris, laconically.
The Professor paused before replying.
We shall at the first board that ship. Then, when we have identified the box, we shall
place a branch of the wild rose on it. This we shall fasten, for when it is there none
can emerge, so that at least says the superstition. And to superstition must we trust at the first.
It was man's faith in the early, and it have its root in faith still. Then, when we get
the opportunity that we seek, when none are near to see, we shall open the box, and, and
all will be well.
I shall not wait for any opportunity, said Morris. When I see the box I shall open it
and destroy the monster, though there were a thousand men looking on, and if I am to
be wiped out for it the next moment.
I grasped his hand instinctively, and found it as firm as a piece of steel. I think he
understood my look. I hope he did.
Good boy, said Dr. Van Helsing. Brave boy. Quincy is all man. God bless him for it.
My child, believe me, none of us shall lag behind or pause from any fear. I do but say
what we may do, what we must do. But indeed, indeed, we cannot say what we may do. There
are so many things which may happen, and their ways and their ends are so various, that until
the moment we may not say.
We shall all be armed in all ways, and when the time for the end has come, our effort
shall not be lack. Now let us today put all our affairs in order. Let all things which
touch on others dear to us, and who on us depend, be complete. For none of us can tell
what or when or how the end may be. As for me, my own affairs are regulate, and as I
have nothing else to do, I shall go make arrangements for the travel. I shall have all tickets
and so forth for our journey.
There was nothing further to be said, and we parted. I shall now settle up all my affairs
of earth, and be ready for whatever may come.
Later. It is done. My will is made, and all complete. Mina, if she survive, is my sole
care. If it should not be so, then the others who have been so good to us, shall have remainder.
It is now drawing towards the sunset. Mina's uneasiness calls my attention to it. I am
sure that there is something on her mind which the time of exact sunset will reveal. These
occasions are becoming harrowing times for us all, for each sunrise and sunset opens
up some new danger, some new pain, which, however, may in God's will be means to a good
end. I write all these things in the diary, since my darling must not hear them now. But
if it may be that she can see them again, they shall be ready. She is calling to me.
2005. In Oceanside, California.
Dracula by Bram Stoker
Dr. Seward's Diary, 11th October, evening.
Jonathan Harker has asked me to note this, as he says he is hardly equal to the task, and he wants an exact record kept.
I think that none of us were surprised when we were asked to see Mrs. Harker a little before the time of sunset.
We have of late come to understand that sunrise and sunset are to her times of peculiar freedom,
when her old self can be manifest without any controlling force subduing or restraining her, or inciting her to action.
This mood or condition begins some half hour or more before actual sunrise or sunset,
and lasts till either the sun is high, or whilst the clouds are still aglow with the rays streaming above the horizon.
At first there is a sort of negative condition, as if some tie were loosened, and then the absolute freedom quickly follows.
When, however, the freedom ceases, the change back or relapse comes quickly, preceded only by a spell of warning silence.
Tonight, when we met, she was somewhat constrained, and bore all the signs of an internal struggle.
I put it down myself to her making a violent effort at the earliest instant she could do so.
A very few minutes, however, gave her complete control of herself.
Then, motioning her husband to sit beside her on the sofa where she was half reclining, she made the rest of us bring chairs up close.
Taking her husband's hand in hers, she began,
We are all here together in freedom for perhaps the last time. I know that you will always be with me to the end.
This was to her husband, whose hand had, as we could see, tightened upon her.
In the morning we go out upon our task, and God alone knows what may be in store for any of us.
You are going to be so good to me to take me with you.
I know that all that brave, earnest men can do for a poor, weak woman, whose soul perhaps is lost.
No, no, not yet, but is at any rate at stake, you will do.
But you must remember that I am not as you are.
There is a poison in my blood, in my soul, which may destroy me, which must destroy me unless some relief comes to us.
Oh, my friends, you know as well as I do that my soul is at stake.
And though I know there is one way out for me, you must not and I must not take it.
She looked appealing to us all in turn, beginning and ending with her husband.
What is that way? asked Van Helsing in a hoarse voice. What is that way which we must not, may not take?
That I may die now, either by my own hand or that of another, before the greater evil is entirely wrought.
I know and you know that were I once dead you could and would set free my immortal spirit, even as you did my poor Lucy's.
Were death or the fear of death the only thing that stood in the way, I would not shrink to die here now amidst the friends who love me.
But death is not all.
I cannot believe that to die in such a case, when there is hope before us and a bitter task to be done, is God's will.
Therefore I am my part. Give up here the certainty of eternal rest, and go out into the dark where may be the blackest things that the world or the netherworld holds.
We were all silent, for we knew instinctively that this was only a prelude.
The faces of the others were set, and Harker's grew ash and gray. Perhaps he guessed better than any of us what was coming.
She continued.
This is what I can give into the hotchpot.
I could not but note the quaint legal phrase which she used in such a place, and with all seriousness.
What will each of you give? Your lives I know, she went on quickly. That is easy for brave men. Your lives are God's, and you can give them back to him. But what will you give to me?
She looked again questioningly, but this time avoided her husband's face.
Quincy seemed to understand. He nodded, and her face lit up.
Then I shall tell you plainly what I want, for there must be no doubtful matter in this connection between us now. You must promise me, one and all, even you, my beloved husband, that should the time come, you will kill me.
What is that time? The voice was Quincy's, but it was low and strained.
When you shall be convinced that I am so changed that it is better that I die than I may live. When I am thus dead in the flesh, then you will, without a moment's delay, drive a stake through me and cut off my head, or do whatever else may be wanting to give me rest.
Quincy was the first to rise after the pause. He knelt down before her, and taking her hand in his said solemnly, I am only a rough fellow who hasn't perhaps lived as a man should to win such a distinction. But I swear to you by all that I hold sacred and dear that, should the time ever come, I shall not flinch from the duty that you have set us. And I promise you too that I shall make all certain, for if I am only doubtful, I shall take it that the time has come.
My true friend was all she could say, amid her fast-falling tears, as bending over she kissed his hand.
I swear the same might the amount of Mina, said Van Helsing.
And I, said Lord Godalming, each of them in turn kneeling to her to take the oath, I followed myself.
Then her husband turned to her wan-eyed, and with a greenish pallor, which subdued the snowy whiteness of his hair, and asked,
And must I too make such a promise, oh my wife?
You too, my dearest, she said, with infinite yearning of pity in her voice and eyes, you must not shrink.
You are nearest and dearest in all the world to me. Our souls are knit into one for all life and all time.
Think, dear, that there have been times when brave men have killed their wives and their womankind to keep them from falling into the hands of the enemy.
Their hands did not falter any the more because those that they love implored them to slay them.
It is men's duty towards those whom they love in such times of sore trial.
And, oh my dear, if it is to be that I must meet death at any hand, let it be at the hand of him that loves me best.
Dr. Van Helsing, I have not forgotten your mercy in poor Lucy's case to him who loved.
She stopped with a flying blush and changed her phrase, to him who had best right to give her peace.
If that time shall come again, I look to you to make it a happy memory of my husband's life that it was his loving hand which set me free from the awful thrall upon me.
Again, I swear, came the professor's resonant voice.
Mrs. Harker smiled, positively smiled, as with a sigh of relief she leaned back and said,
And now one word of warning, a warning which you must never forget.
This time, if it ever come, may come quickly and unexpectedly, and in such case you must lose no time in using your opportunity.
At such a time I myself might be, nay, at the time ever come shall be, lead with your enemy against you.
One more request, she became very solemn as she said this.
It is not vital and necessary like the other, but I want you to do one thing for me, if you will.
We all acquiesced, but no one spoke. There was no need to speak.
I want you to read the burial service.
She was interrupted by a deep groan from her husband.
Taking his hand in hers, she held it over her heart and continued.
You must read it over me some day.
Whatever may be the issue of all this fearful state of things, it will be a sweet thought to all or some of us.
You, my dearest, will I hope read it, for then it will be in your voice in my memory for ever, come what may.
But, oh, my dear one, he pleaded, death is afar off from you.
Nay, she said, holding up a warning hand, I am deeper in death at this moment than if the weight of an earthly grave lay heavy upon me.
Oh, my wife, must I read it, he said before he began.
It would comfort me, my husband, was all she said, and he began to read when she had got the book ready.
How can I, how could anyone, tell of that strange scene, its solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror, and with all its sweetness?
Even a skeptic, who can see nothing but a travesty of bitter truth in anything holy or emotional,
would have been melted to the heart had he seen that little group of loving and devoted friends kneeling round that stricken and sorrowing lady,
or heard the tender passion of her husband's voice, as intoned so broken and emotional that often he had to pause.
He read the simple and beautiful service from the burial of the dead.
I cannot go on, words and voices fail me.
She was right in her instinct.
Strange as it was, bizarre as it may hereafter seem, even to us who felt its potent influence at the time, it comforted us much.
And the silence which showed Mrs. Harker's coming relapse from her freedom of soul did not seem so full of despair to any of us as we had dreaded.
Jonathan Harker's Journal, 15 October, Varna
We left Charing Cross on the morning of the 12th, got to Paris the same night, and took the places secured for us in the Orient Express.
We traveled night and day, arriving here at about five o'clock.
Lord Goodalming went to Consulate to see if any telegram had arrived for him, while the rest of us came on to this hotel, the Odessus.
The journey may have had incidents, I was however too eager to get on to care for them.
Until the Tsarina Catherine comes into port there will be no interest for me in anything in the wide world.
Thank God Mina is well and looks to be getting stronger.
Her color is coming back, she sleeps a great deal.
Throughout the journey she slept nearly all the time.
Before sunrise and sunset, however, she is very wakeful and alert, and it has become a habit for Van Helsing to hypnotize her at such times.
At first some effort was needed and he had to make many passes, but now she seems to yield at once, as if by habit, and scarcely any action is needed.
He seems to have power at those particular moments to simply will, and her thoughts obey him.
He always asks her what she can see and hear.
She answers to the first,
It is evident that the Tsarina Catherine is still at sea, hastening on her way to Varna.
Lord Godalming has just returned.
He had four telegrams, one each day since we started, and all to the same effect, that the Tsarina Catherine had not been reported to the Lloyds from anywhere.
He had arranged before leaving London that his agent should send him every day a telegram saying if the ship had been reported.
He was to have a message even if she were not reported, so that he might be sure that there was a watch being kept at the other end of the wire.
We had dinner and went to bed early.
Tomorrow we are to see the vice-consul, and to arrange, if we can, about getting on board the ship as soon as she arrives.
Van Helsink says that our chance will be to get on the boat between sunrise and sunset.
The Count, even if he takes the form of a bat, cannot cross the running water of his own volition, and so cannot leave the ship.
As he dare not change to man's form without suspicion, which he evidently wishes to avoid, he must remain in the box.
If then we can come on board after sunrise, he is at our mercy, for we can open the box and make sure of him as we did of poor Lucy before he wakes.
What mercy he shall get from us all will not count for much.
We think that we shall not have much trouble with officials or the seamen.
Thank God, this is the country where bribery can do anything, and we are well supplied with money.
We have only to make sure that the ship cannot come into port between sunset and sunrise without our being warned, and we shall be safe.
Judge Moneybag will settle this case, I think.
16th October.
Mina's report still the same. Lapping waves and rushing water, darkness and favoring winds.
We are evidently in good time, and when we hear of the Tsarina Catherine, we shall be ready.
As she must pass the Dardanelles, we are sure to have some report.
17th October.
Everything is pretty well fixed now, I think, to welcome the Count on his return from his tour.
Godalming told the shippers that he fancied that the box sent aboard might contain something stolen from a friend of his, and got a half consent that he might open it at his own risk.
The owner gave him a paper telling the captain to give him every facility in doing whatever he chose on board the ship, and also a similar authorization to his agent at Varna.
We have seen the agent, who is much impressed with Godalming's kindly manner to him, and we are all satisfied that whatever he can do to aid our wishes will be done.
We have also arranged what to do in case we get the box open.
If the Count is there, Van Helsing and Seward will cut off his head at once and drive a stake through his heart.
Morris and Godalming and I shall prevent interference, even if we have to use the arms which we shall have ready.
The Professor says that if we can so treat the Count's body, it will soon after fall into dust.
In such case, there would be no evidence against us, in case any suspicion of murder were aroused.
But even if it were not, we should stand or fall by our act, and perhaps some day this very script may be evidence to come between some of us and a rope.
For myself, I should take the chance only too thankfully if it were to come.
We mean to leave no stone unturned to carry out our intent.
We have arranged with certain officials that the instant the Tsarina Catherine is seen, we are to be informed by a special messenger.
24th October. A whole week of waiting. Daily telegrams to Godalming, but only the same story. Not yet reported.
Mina's morning and evening hypnotic answer is unvaried. Lapping waves, rushing water, and creaking masts.
Telegram. October 24th. Rufus Smith, Lloyds, London. To Lloyd Godalming, care of HBM Vice Consul Varna.
Tsarina Catherine reported this morning from Dardanelles.
Dr. Seward's Diary. 25th October.
How I miss my phonograph. To write a diary with a pen is irksome to me. But Van Helsing says I must.
We were all wild with excitement yesterday when Godalming got his telegram from Lloyds. I know now what men feel in battle when the call to action is heard.
Mrs. Harker, alone of our party, did not show any signs of emotion. After all, it is not strange that she did not, for we took special care not to let her know anything about it, and we all tried not to show any excitement when we were in her presence.
In old days she would, I am sure, have noticed, no matter how we might have tried to conceal it.
But in this way she has greatly changed during the past three weeks. The lethargy grows upon her, and though she seems strong and well and is getting back some of her color, Van Helsing and I are not satisfied. We talk of her often.
We have not, however, said a word to the others. It would break poor Harker's heart, certainly his nerve, if he knew that we had even a suspicion on the subject.
Van Helsing examines, he tells me, her teeth very carefully, while she is in the hypnotic condition, for he says that so long as they do not begin to sharpen, there is no active danger of a change in her.
If this change should come, it would be necessary to take steps. We both know what those steps would have to be, though we do not mention our thoughts to each other.
We should neither of us shrink from the task, awful though it may be, to contemplate. Euthanasia is an excellent and comforting word, and I am grateful to whoever invented it.
It is only about 24 hours' sail from the Dardanelles to here, at the rate that Zarina Catherine has come from London. She should therefore arrive sometime in the morning, but as she cannot possibly get in before noon, we are all about to retire early. We shall get up at one o'clock, so as to be ready.
25th October, noon. No news yet of the ship's arrival. Mrs. Harker's hypnotic report this morning was the same as usual, so it is possible that we may get news at any moment.
We men are all in a fever of excitement, except Harker, who is calm. His hands are cold as ice, and an hour ago I found him wetting the edge of the great Gurkha knife which he now always carries with him.
It will be a bad lookout for the Count if the edge of that kukri ever touches his throat, driven by that stern, ice-cold hand.
Van Helsing and I were a little alarmed about Mrs. Harker today. About noon she got into a sort of lethargy which we did not like.
Although we kept silence to the others, we were neither of us happy about it. She had been restless all the morning, so that we were at first glad to know that she was sleeping.
When, however, her husband mentioned casually that she was sleeping so soundly that he could not wake her, we went to her room to see for ourselves.
She was breathing naturally, and looked so well and peaceful that we agreed that the sleep was better for her than anything else.
Poor girl. She has so much to forget that it is no wonder that sleep, if it brings oblivion to her, does her good.
Later. Our opinion was justified, for when after a refreshing sleep of some hours she woke up, she seemed brighter and better than she had been for days.
At sunset she made the usual hypnotic report. Wherever he may be in the Black Sea, the Count is hurrying to his destination. To his doom, I trust.
26th October. Another day and no tidings of the Tsarina Catherine. She ought to be here by now, but she is still journeying somewhere as apparent, for Mrs. Harker's hypnotic report at sunrise was still the same.
It is possible that the vessel may be lying by at times for fog. Some of the steamers which came in last evening reported patches of fog both to the north and south of the port.
We must continue our watching as the ship may now be signaled any moment.
27th October. Noon.
Most strange. No news yet of the ship we wait for. Mrs. Harker reported last night and this morning, as usual, lapping waves and rushing water, though she added that the waves were very faint.
The telegrams from London have been the same. No further report.
Van Helsing is terribly anxious and told me just now that he fears the Count is escaping us. He added significantly.
I did not like that lethargy of Madame Mina's. Souls and memories can do strange things during trance.
I was about to ask him more, but Harker just then came in and he held up a warning hand. We must try tonight at sunset to make her speak more fully when in her hypnotic state.
28th October. Telegram. Rufus Smith. London. To Lord Goodalming. Kara HBM Vice Consul Varna. Zarina Catherine reported entering Galatz at 1 o'clock today.
Dr. Seward's Diary. 28th October.
When the telegram came announcing the arrival in Galatz, I do not think it was such a shock to any of us as might have been expected.
True, we did not know whence or how or when the bolt would come, but I think we all expected that something strange would happen.
The day of arrival at Varna made us individually satisfied that things would not be just as we had expected. We only waited to learn where the change would occur.
Nonetheless, however, it was a surprise. I suppose that nature works on such a hopeful basis that we believe against ourselves that things will be as they ought to be, not as we should know that they will be.
Transcendentalism is a beacon to the angels, even if it be a will of the wisp to man.
Van Helsing raised his hand over his head for a moment, as though in remonstrance with the Almighty, but he said not a word, and in a few seconds stood up with his face sternly set.
Lord Goodalming grew very pale and sat breathing heavily. I was myself half stunned and looked in wonder at one after another.
Quincy Morris tightened his belt with that quick movement which I knew so well. In our old wandering days it meant action.
Mrs. Harker grew ghastly white so that the scar on her forehead seemed to burn, but she folded her hands meekly and looked up in prayer.
Harker smiled, actually smiled, the dark, bitter smile of one who is without hope, but at the same time his action belied his words, for his hands instinctively sought the hilt of the great Kukri knife and rested there.
You forget, or perhaps you do not know, though Jonathan does, and so does Dr. Van Helsing, that I am the train fiend.
At home in Exeter I always used to make up the timetables so as to be helpful to my husband. I found it so useful sometimes that I always make a study of the timetables now.
I knew that if anything were to take us to Castle Dracula we should go by Galatz, or at any rate through Bucharest, so I learned the times very carefully.
Unhappily there are not many to learn, as the only train to-morrow leaves as I say.
Wonderful woman, murmured the professor.
Can't we get a special? asked Orgedalming.
Van Helsing shook his head.
I fear not. This land is very different from yours or mine. Even if we did have a special, it would probably not arrive as soon as our regular train.
Moreover, we have something to prepare. We must think.
Now let us organize. Your friend Arthur, go to the train and get the tickets and arrange that all be ready for us to go in the morning.
Through your friend Jonathan, go to the agent of the ship and get from him letters to the agent in Galatz, with authority to make a search of the ship just as it was here.
Quincy Morris, you see the vice-counsel, and get his aid with his fellow in Galatz, and all he can do to make our way smooth, so that no times be lost when over the Danube.
John will stay with Madame Mina and me, and we shall consult. For so, if time be long, you may be delayed, and it will not matter when the sun sets, since I am here with Madame to make report.
And I, said Mrs. Harker brightly, and more like her old self than she had been for many a long day, shall try to be of use in all ways, and shall think and write for you as I used to do. Something is shifting from me in some strange way, and I feel freer than I have been of late.
The three younger men looked happier at the moment, as they seemed to realize the significance of her words. But Van Helsing and I, turning to each other, met each a grave and troubled glance. We said nothing at the time, however.
When the three men had gone out to their tasks, Van Helsing asked Mrs. Harker to look up the copy of the diaries, and find him the part of Harker's journal at the castle. She went away to get it.
When the door was shut upon her, he said to me, We mean the same. Speak out.
Here is some change. It is a hope that makes me sick, for it may deceive us.
Quite so. Do you know why I asked her to get the manuscript?
No, said I, unless it was to get an opportunity of seeing me alone.
You are in part right, friend John, but only in part. I want to tell you something, and, oh my friend, I am taking a terrible risk. But I believe it is right.
In the moment when Madame Mina said those words that arrest both our understanding, an inspiration came to me.
In the trance of three days ago, the Count sent her his spirit to read her mind.
Or more like he took her to see him in his earth box in the ship with water rushing, just as it got free at rise and set of sun.
He learned then that we are here, for she have more to tell in her open life with eyes to see, ears to hear than he, shut as he is, in his coffin box. Now he make his most effort to escape us. At present he want her not.
He is sure with his so great knowledge that she will come at his call. But he cut her off, take her as he can do, out of his own power, that so she come not to him.
Ah, there I have hoped that our man-brains that have been of man so long, and that have not lost the grace of God, will come higher than his child-brain that lie in his tomb for centuries, that grow not yet to our stature, and that do only work selfish and therefore small.
Here comes Madame Mina, not a word to her of her trance. She knows it not. And it would overwhelm her and make despair just when we want all her hope, all her courage, when most we want all her great brain which is trained like man's brain, but is of sweet woman and have a special power which the Count give her, and which he may not take away altogether, though he think not so.
Hush, let me speak and you shall learn. John, my friend, we are in awful straits. I fear as I never feared it before. We can only trust the good God. Silence, here she comes.
I thought that the Professor was going to break down and have hysterics, just as he had when Lucy died, but with a great effort he controlled himself, and was at perfect nervous poise when Mrs. Harker tripped into the room, bright and happy-looking, and in the doing of work seemingly forgetful of her misery.
As she came in, she handed a number of sheets of typewriting to Van Helsing. He looked over them gravely, his face brightening up as he read. Then, holding the pages between his finger and thumb, he said,
Friend John, to you with so much experience already, and you too, dear Madam Mina, that are young, here is a lesson. Do not fear ever to think. A half-thought has been buzzing often in my brain, but I fear to let him loose his wings. Here now, with more knowledge, I go back to where that half-thought come from and I find that he be no half-thought at all.
That be a whole thought, though so young that he is not yet strong to use his little wings. Nay, like the ugly duck of my friend Hans Anderson, he be no dark thought at all, but a big swan thought to sail nobly on big wings when the time come for him to try them. See, I read here what Jonathan hath written.
That other of his ways who, in a later age, again and again, brought his forces over the great river in the Turkland, who, when he was beaten back, came again and again and again, though he had come alone from the bloody field where his troops were being slaughtered, since he knew that he alone could ultimately triumph.
What does this tell us? Not much? No. The celt's child thought see nothing, therefore he speaks so free. Your man thought see nothing. My man thought see nothing till just now. No. But there comes another word from someone who speak without thought, because she too know not what it mean, what it might mean.
Just as there are elements which rest, yet when in nature's course they move on their way and they touch the poof, and there comes a flash of light heaven-wide that blind and kill and destroy some, but that show up all earth below for leagues and leagues. Is it not so?
Well, I shall explain. To begin, have you ever studied the philosophy of crime? Yes and no. You drawn yes, for it is a study of insanity. You know, Madame Mina, for crime touch you not, not but once.
Still, your mind works true and argues not, a particularly odd universal. There is this peculiarity in criminals. It is so constant in all countries and at all times that even police, who know not much from philosophy, come to know it empirically that it is. That is to be empiric.
The criminal always works at one crime. That is the true criminal who seems predestinate to crime and who will of none other. This criminal has not full man brain. He is clever and cunning and resourceful, but he be not of man's stature as to brain. He be of child brain in much.
Now, this criminal of ours is predestinate to crime also. He too have child brain, and it is of the child to do what he have done. The little bird, the little fish, the little animal, not by principle but empirically. And when he learn to do, then there is to him the ground to start from to do more.
Das puh sto, said Archimedes. Give me a fulcrum and I shall move the world. To do once is the fulcrum whereby child brain become man brain. And until he have the purpose to do more, he continue to do the same, again, every time, just as he have done before. Oh, my dear, I see that your eyes are opened and that to you the lightning flash show all the leagues. For Mrs. Harker began to clap her hands and her eyes sparkled.
He went on. Now you shall speak. Tell us, two dry men of science, what you see with those so bright eyes. He took her hand and held it whilst he spoke. His fingers and thumb closed on her pulse, as I thought instinctively and unconsciously, as she spoke.
The Count is a criminal and a criminal type. Norda and Lombroso would so classify him, and quote criminal, he is of an imperfectly formed mind. Thus, in a difficulty, he has to seek resource in habit. His past is a clue, and the one page of it that we know, and that from his own lips, tells that once before, when in what Mr. Morris would call a tight place, he went back to his own country from the land he had tried to invade, and thence,
without losing purpose, prepared himself for a new effort. He came again better equipped for his work, and won. So he came to London to invade a new land. He was beaten, and when all hope of success was lost, and his existence in danger, he fled back over the sea to his home, just as formerly he had fled back over the Danube from Turkey-land.
"'Good, good! Oh, you're so clever, lady,' said Van Helsink, enthusiastically, as he stooped and kissed her hand. A moment later he said to me, as calmly as though we had been having a sickroom consultation, "'Seventy-two only, and in all this excitement, I have hope.'" Turning to her again, he said with keen expectation, "'But go on, go on! There is more to tell, if you will. Be not afraid. John and I know. I do in any case, and shall tell you, if you are right.'
"'Speak without fear. I will try to, but you will forgive me if I seem too egotistical. Nah, fear not. You must be egotist, for it is of you that we think.'"
Then, as he is criminal, he is selfish. And as his intellect is small, and his action is based on selfishness, he confines himself to one purpose. That purpose is remorseless. As he fled back over the Danube, leaving his forces to be cut to pieces, so now he is intent on being safe, careless of all.
So his own selfishness frees my soul somewhat from the terrible power which he acquired over me on that dreadful night. I felt it! Oh, I felt it! Thank God for his great mercy! My soul is freer than it has been since that awful hour, and all that haunts me is a fear, lest in some trance or dream he may have used my knowledge for his ends.
The professor stood up. He has, so used your mind. And by it he has left us here in Varna, whilst the ship that carried him rushed through enveloping fog up to Glatz, where doubtless he had made preparation for escaping from us. But his child-mind only saw so far.
And it may be that as ever is in God's providence, the very thing that the evildoer most reckoned on for his selfish good turns out to be his chiefest harm. The hunter is taken in his own snare, as the great psalmist says.
For now that he thinks he is free from every trace of us all, and that he has escaped us with so many hours to him, then his selfish child-brain will whisper him to sleep. He thinks, too, that as he cuts himself off from knowing your mind, there can be no knowledge of him to you, and that is where he fails.
That terrible baptism of blood which he gave you makes you free to go to him in spirit, as you have yet yet done in your times of freedom when the sun rise and set. At such times you go by my volition and not by his. And this power to good of you and others you have won from your suffering at his hands.
This is now all more precious that he know it not, and to God himself have even cut himself off from his knowledge of our where. We, however, are not selfish, and we believe that God is with us through all this blackness and these many dark hours.
We shall follow him, and we shall not flinch, even if we peril ourselves that we become like him. Friend John, this has been a great hour, and it have done much to advance us on our way. You must prescribe and write him all down, so that when the others return from their work you can give it to them, then they shall know as we do.
And so I have written it, whilst we wait their return, and Mrs. Harker has written with the typewriter all since she brought the manuscript to us.
Dracula by Bram Stoker
Dr. Seward's Diary
29 October
This is written in the train from Varna to Galatz.
Last night we all assembled a little before the time of sunset.
Each of us has done his work as well as he could, as far as thought and endeavor and opportunity go.
We are prepared for the whole of our journey and for our work when we get to Galatz.
When the usual time came round Mrs. Harker prepared herself for her hypnotic effort
and after a longer and more serious effort on the part of Van Helsing
than had been usually necessary she sank into the trance.
Usually she speaks on a hint but this time the professor had to ask her questions
and had to ask them pretty resolutely before we could learn anything.
At last her answer came.
I can see nothing. We are still.
There are no waves lapping but only a steady swirl of water running softly against the hauser.
I can hear men's voices calling near and far and the roll and creak of oars in the rowlocks.
A gun is fired somewhere. The echo of it seems far away.
There is trampling of feet overhead and ropes and chains are dragged along.
What is this? There is a gleam of light. I can feel the air blowing upon me.
Here she stopped. She had risen as if impulsively from where she lay on the sofa
and raised both her hands palms upwards as if lifting a weight.
Van Helsing and I looked at each other with understanding.
Quincy raised his eyebrows slightly and looked at her intently
whilst Harker's hand instinctively closed round the hilt of his kukri.
There was a long pause.
We all knew that the time when she could speak was passing
but we felt that it was useless to say anything.
Suddenly she sat up and as she opened her eyes said sweetly
Would none of you like a cup of tea?
You must all be so tired.
We could only make her happy and so Aqua asked.
She bustled off to get tea.
When she had gone Van Helsing said
You see my friends he is close to land.
He has left his earth chest but he is yet to get on shore.
In the night he may lie hidden somewhere
but if he be not carried on shore or if the ship do not touch it
he cannot achieve the land.
In such case he can if it be in the night change his form and jump or fly on shore.
Then unless he be carried he cannot escape
and if he be carried then the customs man may discover what the box contain.
Thus and fine if he escaped not on shore tonight or before dawn
there will be the whole day lost to him.
We may then arrive in time
For he escaped not at night we shall come on him in day time
boxed up and at our mercy
for he dare not be his true self awake and visible
lest he be discovered.
There was no more to be said
so he waited in patience until the dawn
at which time we might learn more from Mrs. Harker.
Early this morning we listened with breathless anxiety
for her response in her trance.
The hypnotic stage was even longer in coming than before
and when it came the time remaining until full sunrise was so short that we began to despair.
Van Helsing seemed to throw his whole soul into the effort.
At last in obedience to his will she made reply.
All is dark.
I hear lapping water level with me
and some creaking as of wood on wood.
She paused and the red sun shot up.
We must wait till tonight.
And so it is that we are travelling towards Galatzin in agony of expectation.
We are due to arrive between two and three in the morning
but already at Bucharest we are three hours late
so we cannot possibly get in till well after sun up.
Thus we shall have two more hypnotic messages from Mrs. Harker.
Either or both may possibly throw some light on what is happening.
Later.
Sunset is come and gone.
Fortunately it came at a time when there was no distraction
for had it occurred whilst we were in the station we might not have secured the necessary calm and isolation.
Mrs. Harker yielded to the hypnotic influence even less readily than this morning.
I am in fear that her power of reading the count sensations may die away
just when we want it most.
It seems to me that her imagination is beginning to work.
While she has been in the trance hitherto she has confined herself to the simplest of facts.
If this goes on it may ultimately mislead us.
If I thought that the count's power over her would die away equally with her power of knowledge
it would be a happy thought.
But I am afraid that it may not be so.
When she did speak her words were ignomadical.
Something is going out.
I can feel it pass me like a cold wind.
I can hear far off confused sounds as if men talking in strange tongues.
Fierce falling water and the howling of wolves.
She stopped and a shudder ran through her.
Increasing in intensity for a few seconds till at the end she shook as though in a palsy.
She said no more, even an answer to the professor's imperative questioning.
When she woke from the trance she was cold and exhausted and languid
but her mind was all alert.
She could not remember anything but asked what she had said.
When she was told she pondered over it deeply for a long time and in silence.
30 October 7 a.m.
We are near Galatz now and I may not have time to write later.
Sunrise this morning was anxiously looked for by us all knowing of the increasing difficulty of procuring the hypnotic trance.
Van Helsing began his passes earlier than usual.
They produced no effect however until the regular time when she yielded with a still greater difficulty
only a minute before the sun rose.
The professor lost no time in his questioning.
Her answer came with equal quickness.
All is dark.
I hear water swirling by level with my ears and the creaking of wood on wood.
Cattle low far off.
There is another sound, a queer one like.
She stopped and grew white and whiter still.
Go on, go on, speak, I command you said Van Helsing in an agonized voice.
At the same time there was despair in his eyes for the risen sun was reddening even Mrs. Harker's pale face.
She opened her eyes and we all started as she said sweetly and seemingly with the utmost unconcern.
Oh professor, why ask me to do what you know I can't?
I don't remember anything.
Then seeing the look of amazement on our faces she said turning from one to the other with a troubled look.
What have I said? What have I done?
I know nothing only that I was lying here half asleep and heard you say go on, speak, I command you.
It seems so funny to hear you order me about as if I were a bad child.
Oh Madame Mina he said sadly.
It is proof, if proof be needed, of how I love and honor you when a word for your good spoken more earnest than ever can seem so strange because it is to order her whom I am proud to obey.
The whistles are sounding. We are nearing Galatz. We are on fire with anxiety and eagerness.
Mina Harker's Journal 30 October
Mr. Morris took me to the hotel where our rooms have been ordered by telegraph, he being the one who could best be spared since he does not speak any foreign language.
The forces were distributed much as they had been at Varna, except that Lord Galdeming went to the vice-consul, as his rank might serve as an immediate guarantee of some sort to the official, we being in extreme hurry.
Jonathan and the two doctors went to the shipping agent to learn particulars of the arrival of the Tsarina Catherine.
Later, Lord Galdeming has returned, the consul is away and the vice-consul sick, so the routine work has been attended to by a clerk.
He was very obliging and offered to do anything in his power.
Jonathan Harker's Journal 30 October
At nine o'clock Dr. Van Helsing, Dr. Seward Nye called on messengers Mackenzie and Steinkopf, the agents of the London firm of Hapgood.
They had received a wire from London in answer to Lord Galdeming's telegraphed request, asking them to show us any civility in their power.
They were more than kind and courteous and took us at once on board the Tsarina Catherine, which lay at anchor out in the river harbour.
There we saw the captain, Donaldson by name, who told us of his voyage. He said that in all his life he had never had so favourable a run.
Man, he said, but it made us go afraid, for we expected if we should have to pay for it with some rare piece of ill-luck so as to keep up the average.
It's no candy to run from a London to the Black Sea with a wind, auntie, as though the Dale himself was blowing on your sail for any purpose, and at the time we came no spare thing.
Again we were nigh a ship or pour a headland a fog fell on us and travelled with us till we were at a heavy lifted, and we looked out the Dale a thing could we see.
We ran by Gibraltar with out be able to signal. Until we came to the Dardanelles we had to wait to get our permit to pass, we never were within hail o'odd.
At first I inclined a slack off the sail and beat about till the fog was lifted, but whilst I thought that the Dale was mine to get us to the Black Sea quick he was like to do it, well, if he were or no.
And if we had a quick voyage it would be no to our miscredit with the owners and no hurt to our traffic, and the old man who served us on purpose would be graceful to us for no hindering him.
This mixture of simplicity and cunning, of superstition and commercial reasoning aroused Van Helsing, who said,
Mine friend, that devil is more clever than he is thought by some, and he know when we meet his match.
The skipper was not displeased with the compliment, and went on,
When we got past the both thrifts the man began to grumble, some of them the Romanians came and asked me to heave overboard a big box to put on board by a queer looking old man just before we had started free in London.
I hadn't seen them spare the fellow and put out the twelfth fingers when they saw him to guard them against the evil eye.
Man, but the superstition of foreigners is perfectly ridiculous.
I sent them about their business pretty quick, but just after the fog closed in on us I felt a wee bit as they did on our something, though I wouldn't say it was again the big box.
Well on we went, and as the fog didn't let up for five days I just let the wing carry us, for if the dealer wanted us to go somewheres well he'd fetch it up a right, as if he didn't well we'd keep a sharp look out anyhow.
Sure enough we had our fire away in a deep water all the time, and two days ago when the morning sun came through the fog we found ourselves just in the river opposite Calise.
The Romanians went wild and wanted me right or wrong to take out the box and fling it in the river. I had to argue with them about it with a hap spike.
And when the last of them rose off the deck with his head in his hand I convinced them that evil eye or no evil eye the property and the trust of my owners are better in my hands than in the river Danube.
They had, mind you, taken the box and the deck ready to fling in and as if they were marked to Calise via Varna, I thought it'd lie to be to start in the port and we'd get rid of it all together.
We didn't do much clearing that day and had to remain the night at anchor, but in the morning, brah, ah, re the world.
An hour before sun up a man came aboard with an order written to him from England to receive a box for one Count Dracula.
Sure enough the honor was all ready for his hand. He had his papers at a rate and glad I was to be rid of the darn thing.
For I was beginning myself to feel uneasy about it. If the Dale did have a luggage aboard the ship I'm thinking it was not neither of them at the same.
What was the name of the man who took it? asked Van Helsing with restrained eagerness.
I'll be telling you quick, he answered, and stepped down to his cabin producing a receipt signed Immanuel Hiddlesliem.
Burgenstraße 16 was the address. We found out this was all the captain knew, so with thanks we came away.
We found Hiddlesliem in his office, a Hebrew of rather the Adelphi theta type with a nose like a sheep and a fez.
His arguments were pointed with specie, we doing the punctuation, and with a little bargaining he told us what he knew.
This turned out to be simple but important. He had received a letter from Mr. Deville of London telling him to receive, if possible before sunrise so as to avoid customs,
a box which would arrive at Galatz and the Zarina Catherine. This he was to give in charge to a certain Petrov Skintki who dealt with the Slovaks who traded down the river to the port.
He had been paid for his work by an English banknote which had been duly cashed for gold at the Danube International Bank.
When Skintki had come to him he had taken him to the ship and handed over the box so as to save porterage. That was all he knew.
We then sought for Skintki but weren't able to find him. One of his neighbors, who did not seem to bear him any affection, said that he had gone away two days before, no one knew whither.
This was collaborated by his landlord who had received by messenger the key of the house together with the rent due, in English money.
This had been between ten and eleven o'clock last night. We were at a standstill again.
Whilst we were talking, one came running and breathlessly gasped out that the body of Skintki had been found inside the well of the churchyard of St. Peter and that the throat had been torn open as if by some wild animal.
Those we had been speaking with ran off to see the horror, the women crying out, this is the work of a Slovak.
We hurried away, lest we should have been in some way drawn into the affair and so detained. As we came home we could arrive at no definite conclusion.
We were all convinced that the box was on its way by water to somewhere, but where that might be we would have to discover. With heavy hearts we came home to the hotel, to Mina.
When we met together the first thing was to consult as to taking Mina again into our confidence.
Things are getting desperate, and it is at least a chance, though a hazardous one, as a preliminary step, I was released from my promise to her.
Mina Harker's Journal. 30 October. Evening.
They were so tired and worn out and dispirited that there was nothing to be done till they had some rest, so I asked them all to lie down for a half hour whilst I should enter everything up to the moment.
I feel so grateful to the man who invented the Traveller's Typewriter, and to Mr. Morris for getting this one for me.
I should have felt quite astray doing the work if I had to write with a pen.
It is all done. Poor, dear, dear Jonathan, what he must have suffered, what he must be suffering now.
He lies on the sofa, hardly seeming to breathe, and his whole body appears in collapse. His brows are knit, his face is drawn with pain.
Poor fellow. Maybe he is thinking, and I can see his face all wrinkled up with the concentration of his thoughts.
Oh, if only I could help at all. I shall do what I can.
I have asked Dr. Van Helsing, and he has gotten me all the papers that I have not yet seen.
Whilst they are resting, I shall go over all carefully, and perhaps I may arrive at some conclusion.
I shall try to follow the Professor's example and think without prejudice and the facts before me.
I do believe that under God's providence I shall have made a discovery. I shall get the maps and look over them.
I am more than ever sure that I am right. My new conclusion is ready, so I shall get our party together and read it.
They can judge it. It is well to be accurate, and every minute is precious.
Mina Harker's Memorandum
Entered in her journal
Ground of inquiry. Count Dracula's problem is to get back to his own place.
A. He must be brought back by someone. This is evident, for he had power to move himself as he wished he could go either as man or wolf or bat, or in some other way.
B. He evidently fears discovery or interference in the state of helplessness in which he must be, confined as he is between dawn and sunset in his wooden box.
B. How is he to be taken? Here a process of exclusions may help us, by road, by rail, by water.
1. By road. There are endless difficulties, especially in leaving the city.
X. There are people, and people are curious and investigate. A hint, a surmise, a doubt as to what might be in the box would destroy him.
Y. There are, or there may be, customs and octroy officers to pass.
Z. His pursuers might follow. This is his highest fear, and in order to prevent his being betrayed he has repelled, so far as he can, even his victim, me.
2. By rail. There is no one in charge of the box. It would have to take its chance of being delayed and delay would be fatal with enemies on the track.
True, he might escape at night. What would he be if left in a strange place with no refuge that he could fly to? This is not what he intends, and he does not mean to risk it.
3. By water. Here is the safest way in one respect, but with most danger in another. On the water he is powerless, except at night. Even then he can only summon fog and storm and snow and his wolves.
But were he wrecked, the living water would engulf him, helpless, and he would indeed be lost. He could have the vessel drive to land, but if it were unfriendly land wherein he was not free to move, his position would still be desperate.
We know from the record that he was on the water, so what we have to do is to ascertain what water. The first thing is to realize exactly what he has done as yet. We may, then, get a light on what his task is to be.
Firstly, we must differentiate between what he did in London as part of his general plan of action, when he was pressed for moments and had to arrange as best he could.
Secondly, we must see, as well as we can surmise it from the facts we know of, what he has done here. As to the first, he evidently intended to arrive at Galatz, and sent invoice to Varna to deceive us lest we should ascertain his means of exit from England.
His immediate and sole purpose, then, was to escape. The proof of this is the letter of instructions sent to Immanuel Heldeschim to clear and take away the box before sunrise. There is also the instruction to Petrovskinsky. These we must only guess at.
But there must have been some letter or message since Ginsky came to Heldeschim, that, so far, his plans were successful, we know. The Tsarina Catherine made a phenomenally quick journey, so much, though, that Captain Donaldson's suspicions were aroused.
But his superstition, united with his canniness, played the Count's game for him, and he ran with his favoring wind through fogs and all, till he brought up blindfold at Galatz. That the Count's arrangements were well made has been proved. Heldeschim cleared the box, took it off, and gave it to Skinsky. Skinsky took it, and here we lose the trail. We only know that the box is somewhere on the water, moving along. The customs and the oktroy.
If there be any, have been avoided.
Now we have come to what the Count must have done after his arrival, on land, at Galatz. The box was given to Skinsky before sunrise. At sunrise the Count would appear in his own form. Here we ask why Skinsky was chosen at all to aid in the work.
In my husband's diary Skinsky is mentioned as dealing with the Slovaks who trade down the river to the port, and the man's remark that the murder was the work of a Slovak showed the general feeling against his class. The Count wanted isolation.
My surmise is this, that in London the Count decided to get back to his castle by water, as the most safe and secret way. He was brought from the Canskill by Skizgani, and probably they delivered their cargo to Slovaks who took the boxes to Varna, for there they were shipped to London, lest the Count had knowledge of the persons who could arrange the service.
When the box was on land before sunrise or after sunset, he came out from his box, met Skinsky and instructed him what to do as to arranging the carriage of the box up some river. When this was done and he knew that all was in train, he blotted out his traces, as he thought, by murdering his agent.
I have examined the map and find that the river most suitable for the Slovaks to have ascended is either the Pruth or the Sarath. I read in the typescript that in my trance I heard cows low and water swirling level with my ears in the creaking of wood.
The Count, in his box then, was on a river in an open boat, propelled probably either by oars or poles, for the banks were near and was working it against stream. There would be no such a floating downstream.
Of course, it may not be either the Sarath or the Pruth, but we may possibly investigate further. Now of these two, the Pruth is the most easily navigated, but the Sarath is, at Fundu, joined by the Bistritza, which runs up round the Borgo Pass. The loop it makes is manifestly as close to Dracula's castle as can be got by water.
Mina Harker's Journal
Continued
When I had done reading, Jonathan took me in his arms and kissed me. The others kept shaking me by both hands, and Dr. Van Helsing said, Our dear Madam Mina is once more our teacher. Her eyes have been where we were blinded. Now we are on the track once again, and this time we may succeed. Our enemy is at his most helpless, and if we can come on him by day, on the water, our task will be over.
He has a start, but he is powerless to hasten, as he may not leave his box lest those who carry him may suspect. For them to suspect would be to prompt them to throw him in this stream where he perish. This he knows and will not. Now, men, to our council of war, for here and now we must plan what each and all shall do.
I shall get a steam-launch, and follow him, said Lord Galdeming.
And I, horses to follow on the bank, lest he chance to land, said Mr. Morris.
Good, said the professor. Both good, but neither must go alone. There must be force to overcome force if need be. The Slovak is strong and rough, and he carries rude arms. All the men smiled, for amongst them they carried a small arsenal, said Mr. Morris.
I have brought some Winchesters. They are pretty, handy in a crowd, and there may be wolves. The Count, if you remember, took some other precautions. He made some requisitions on others that Mrs. Harker could not quite hear or understand. We must be ready at all points.
Dr. Seward said,
I think I had better go with Quincy.
We have been accustomed to hunt together, and we too, well armed, will be a match for whatever may come along.
You must not be alone, Art. It may be necessary to fight the Slovaks, and a chance thrust, for I don't suppose these fellows carry guns, would undo all our plans. There must be no chances this time. We shall not rest until the Count's head and body have been separated, and we are sure that he cannot reincarnate.
He looked at Jonathan as he spoke, and Jonathan looked at me. I could see that the poor dear was torn about in his mind. Of course he wanted to be with me, but then the Boat Service would, most likely, be the one that would destroy the, the vampire. Why did I hesitate to write the word?
He was silent a while, and during his silence Dr. Van Helsing spoke,
Friend Jonathan, this is to you for twice reasons. First because you are young and brave and can fight, and all the energies may be needed at the last. And again that it is your right to destroy him, that which has wrought such a row to you and others. Be not afraid for Madame Mina. She will be my care, if I may. I am old.
My legs are not so quick to run as once, and I am not used to ride so long or pursue as need be, or to fight with lethal weapons. But I can be of other service. I can fight another way, and I can die if need be as well as younger men.
Now let me say that what I would is this. While you, my Lord Galdeming, and Friend Jonathan go in your so swift little steamboat up the river, and whilst John and Quincy guard the bank where perchance he might be landed, I will take Madame Mina right into the heart of the enemy's country.
Whilst the old fox is tied in his boat, floating on the running stream whence he cannot escape to land, where he dares not raise the lid of his coffin box lest his Slovak carrier should in fear leave him to perish, we shall go in the track where Jonathan went, from bestriets over the Borgo and find our way to the Castle of Dracula.
Here Madame Mina's hypnotic power will surely help, and we shall find our way. All dark and unknown otherwise, after the first sunset we are near that fateful place. There is much to be done and other places to be made sanctified so that the nest of the vipers be obliterated.
Here, Jonathan interrupted him hotly.
Do you mean to say, Professor Van Helsing, that you would bring Mina, in her sad case and tainted as she is with the devil's illness, right into the jaws of his death trap? Not for the world, not for heaven or hell.
He became almost speechless for a minute, and then went on.
Do you know what that place is?
Have you seen that awful den of hellish infamy, with the very moonlight alive with grisly shapes and every speck of dust that whirls in the wind a devouring monster and embryo? Have you felt the vampire's lips upon your throat?
Here he turned to me, and as his eyes lit on my forehead he threw up his arms with a cry.
Oh my God! What have we done to have this terror upon us?
And he sank down on the sofa in a collapse of misery.
The professor's voice, as he spoke in clear sweet tones which seemed to vibrate in the air, calmed us all.
Oh my friend, it is because I would save Madame Mina from this awful place that I would go. God forbid that I should take her into that place. There is work, wild work, to be done before that place can be purified.
Remember that we are in terrible straits. If the Count escape us this time, and he is strong and subtle and cunning, he may choose to sleep him for a century, and then at that time our dear one, he took my hand, would come to him to keep him company, and would be as those others that you, Jonathan, saw.
You have told us of their gloating lips. You heard their ribald laugh as they clutched the moving bag that the Count threw to them. You shudder, and well may it be. Forgive me that I make you so much pain, but it is necessary.
My friend, is it not a dire need for that which I am giving, possibly my life? If it were that anyone went into that place to stay, it is I who would have to go to keep them company.
Do as you will, said Jonathan, with a sob that shook him all over. We are in the hands of God.
Later.
Oh, it did me good to see the way that these brave men worked. How can women help loving men when they were so earnest and so true and so brave? And, too, it made me think of the wonderful power of money. What can it not do when basely used?
I felt so thankful that Lord Galdiming is rich, and both he and Mr. Morris, who also has plenty of money, are willing to spend it so freely, for if they did not our little expedition could not start, either so promptly or so well equipped as it will within another hour.
It is not three hours since it was arranged what part each of us was to do, and now Lord Galdiming and Jonathan have a lovely steam-launch with steam up ready to start at a moment's notice. Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris have half a dozen good horses, well appointed. We all have the maps and appliances of various kinds that can be had.
Professor Van Helsing and I are to leave by the eleven-forty train tonight for Fresti, where we are to get a carriage to drive to the Borgo Pass. We are bringing a great deal of ready money, as we are to buy a carriage and horses. We shall drive ourselves, for we have no one whom we can trust in the matter.
The Professor knows something of a great many languages, so we shall get on all right. We have all got arms, even for me a large bore revolver. Jonathan would not be happy unless I was armed like the rest. Alas, I cannot carry one arm that the rest do. The scar on my forehead forbids that.
Dear Dr. Van Helsing comforts me by telling me that I am fully armed as there may be wolves. The weather is getting colder every hour, and there are snow flurries which come and go as warnings.
Later. It took all my courage to say goodbye to my darling. We may never meet again.
Courage, Mina. The Professor is looking at you keenly. His look is a warning. There must be no tears now, lest it may be that God will let them fall in gladness.
Jonathan Harker's Journal. 30 October. Night.
I am writing this in the light from the furnace door of the steam-launch. Lord Galdeming is firing up. He is an experienced hand at the work, as he has had for years a launch of his own on the Thames and another on the Norfolk broads.
Regarding our plans, we finally decided that Mina's guess was correct, and that if any waterway was chosen for the Count's escape back to his castle, the Sareth, and then the Bistritzad, its junction, would be the one.
We took it, that somewhere about the 47th degree north latitude would be the place chosen for the crossing, the country between the river and the Carpathians.
We have no fear in running a good speed up the river at night. There is plenty of water, and the banks are wide enough apart to make steaming, even in the dark, easy enough.
Lord Galdeming tells me to sleep for a while, as it is enough for the present for one to be on watch. But I cannot sleep. How can I with the terrible danger hanging over my darling, and her going out into that awful place?
My only comfort is that we are in the hands of God. Only for that faith it would be easier to die than to live, and so be quit of all the trouble.
Mr. Morris and Dr. Steward were off on their long ride before we started. They are to keep up the right bank, far enough off to get on higher lands where they can see a good stretch of river and avoid the following of its curves.
They have, for the first stages, two men to ride and lead their spare horses, four in all, so as not to excite curiosity.
When they dismiss the men, which shall be shortly, they shall themselves look after the horses. It may be necessary for us to join forces. If so, they can mount our whole party. One of the saddles has a movable horn and can be easily adapted for Mina, if required.
It is a wild adventure we are on. Here, as we are rushing on through the darkness, with the cold from the river seeming to rise up and strike us, with all the mysterious voices of the night around us, it all comes home.
We seem to be drifting into unknown places and unknown ways, into a whole world of dark and dreadful things. Valdeming is shutting the furnace door.
31. October
Still hurrying along. The day has come and Valdeming is sleeping. I am on watch.
The morning is bitterly cold. The furnace heat is grateful, though we have heavy fur coats. As yet we have passed only a few open boats, but none of them had on board any box or package of anything like the size of the one we seek.
The men were scared every time we turned our electric lamp on them, and fell on their knees and prayed.
1. November
Evening. No news all day. We have found nothing of the kind we seek. We have now passed into the Bistritza, and if we are wrong in our surmise, our chance is gone.
We have overhauled every boat, big and little. Early this morning one crew took us for a government boat and treated us accordingly. We saw in this a way of smoothing matters, so at Fundu, where the Bistritza runs into the Sareth, we got a Romanian flag which we now fly conspicuously.
With every boat which we have overhauled since then, this trick has succeeded. We have had every deference shown to us, and not once any objection to whatever we chose to ask or do.
Some of the Slovaks tell us that a big boat passed them, going at more than usual speed as she had a double crew on board. This was before they came to Fundu, so they could not tell us whether the boat turned into the Bistritza or continued up on the Sareth.
At Fundu we could not hear of any such boat, so she must have passed there in the night. I am feeling very sleepy. The cold is perhaps beginning to tell upon me, and nature must have rest some time.
Galdeming insists that he shall keep the first watch. God bless him for all his goodness to poor dear Mina and me.
2. November. Morning. It is broad daylight. That good fellow would not wake me. He says it would have been a sin too, for I slept peacefully and was forgetting my trouble.
It seems brutally selfish to me to have slept so long and let him watch all night, but he was quite right. I am a new man this morning.
And as I sit here and watch him sleeping, I can do all that is necessary both as to minding the engines, steering and keeping watch. I can feel that my strength and energy are coming back to me.
I wonder where Mina is now, and Van Helsing. They should have got to Varetsi about noon on Wednesday. It would take them some time to get the carriage and the horses, so if they had started and travelled hard, they would be about now at the Borgo Pass.
God guide and help them. I am afraid to think what may happen. If we could only go faster, but we cannot. The engines are throbbing and doing the rut most. I wonder how Dr. Steward and Mr. Morris are getting on.
There seem to be endless streams running down the mountains into this river, but as none of them are very large, at present, at all events, though they are doubtless terrible in winter and when the snow melts.
The horsemen may not have met much obstruction. I hope that before we get to Straspa, we may see them, for if by that time we have not overtaken the count, it may be necessary to take counsel together what to do next.
Dr. Steward's Diary
2 November
Three days on the road. No news and no time to write it if there had been, for every moment is precious. We have had only the rest needful for the horses, but we are bearing it wonderfully. Those adventurous days of ours are turning up useful. We must push on. We shall never feel happy till we get the launch in sight again.
3 November
We heard at Fundu that the launch had gone up the Bistritsa. I wish it wasn't so cold. There are signs of snow coming, and if it falls heavy it will stop us. In such case we must get a sledge and go on, Russian fashion.
4 November
Today we heard of the launch having been detained by an accident when trying to force away up the rapids. The Slovak boats get up all right by aid of a rope and steering with knowledge. Some went up only a few hours before. Guldeming is an amateur fitter himself and evidently it was he who put the launch in trim again.
Finally they got up the rapids all right with local help and are off on the chase afresh. I fear that the boat is not any better for the accident. Peasantry tell us that after she got upon the smooth water again she kept stopping every now and again, so long as she was in sight. We must push on harder than ever. Our help may be wanted soon.
Minna Harker's Journal
31 October
Arrived at Varetsy at noon. The professor tells me that this morning at dawn he could hardly hypnotize me at all, and all that I could say was dark and quiet. He is off now buying a carriage and horses. He says that he will later on try to buy additional horses that we may be able to change them on the way. We have something more than seventy miles before us.
The country is lovely and most interesting. If only we were under different conditions how delightful it would be to see it all. If Jonathan and I were driving through it alone what a pleasure it would be to stop and see people and learn something of their life and to fill our minds and memories with all the color and picturesqueness of the whole wide beautiful country and the quaint people.
But alas!
Later.
Dr. Van Helsing has returned. He has got the carriage and horses. We are to have some dinner and to start in an hour. The landlady is putting us up a huge basket of provisions. It seems enough for a company of soldiers.
The professor encourages her and whispers to me that it may be a week before we get any food again. He has been shopping too and has sent home such a wonderful lot of fur coats and wraps and all sorts of warm things. There will not be any chance of our being cold.
We shall soon be off. I am afraid to think what may happen to us. We are truly in the hands of God. He alone knows what may be and I pray him with all the strength of my sad and humble soul that he will watch over my beloved husband.
That whatever may happen, Jonathan may know that I loved him and honored him more than I can say and that my latest and truest thought will always be for him.
Biscuit West, Prince Edward Island
DRACULA by Bram Stoker
Mina Harker's Journal
1. November
All day long we have traveled,
and at a good speed.
The horses seem to know that they are being kindly treated, for they go willingly their full stage at best speed.
We have now had so many changes and find the same thing so constantly that we are encouraged to think that the journey will be an easy one.
Dr. Van Helsing is laconic.
He tells the farmers that he is hurrying to Bistritz,
and pays them well to make the exchange of horses.
We get hot soup, or coffee, or tea, and off we go.
It is a lovely country,
full of beauties of all imaginable kinds,
and the people are brave and strong and simple,
and seem full of nice qualities.
They are very, very superstitious.
In the first house where we stopped when the woman who served us saw the scar on my forehead,
she crossed herself and put out two fingers toward me to keep off the evil eye.
I believe they went to the trouble of putting an extra amount of garlic into our food,
and I can't abide garlic.
Ever since then I have taken care not to take off my hat or veil,
and so have escaped their suspicions.
We are traveling fast, and as we have no driver with us to carry tails,
we go ahead of scandal,
but I dare say that fear of the evil eye will follow hard behind us all the way.
The professor seems tireless.
All day he would not take any rest, though he made me sleep for a long spell.
At sunset time he hypnotized me, and he says I answered as usual.
Darkness, lapping water, and creaking wood.
So our enemy is still on the river.
I am afraid to think of Jonathan,
but somehow I have now no fear for him or for myself.
I write this whilst we wait in a farmhouse for the horses to be ready.
Dr. Van Helsing is sleeping.
Poor dear, he looks very tired and old and gray,
but his mouth is set as firmly as a conqueror's.
Even in his sleep he is intense with resolution.
When we have started I must make him rest whilst I drive.
I shall tell him that we have days before us,
and he must not break down when most of all his strength will be needed.
All is ready.
We are off shortly.
2. November. Morning.
I was successful, and we took turns driving all night.
Now the day is on us, bright though cold.
There is a strange heaviness in the air.
I say heaviness for one of a better word.
I mean that it oppresses us both.
It is very cold, and only our warm furs keep us comfortable.
At dawn Van Helsing hypnotized me.
He says I answered darkness, creaking wood and roaring water,
so the river is changing as they ascend.
I do hope that my darling will not run any chance of danger,
more than need be, but we are in God's hands.
2. November. Night.
All day long driving.
The country gets wilder as we go, and the great spurs of the Carpathians,
which at Varetsi seem so far from us and so low on the horizon,
now seem to gather round us and tower in front.
We both seem in good spirits.
I think we make an effort to cheer the other.
In the doing so, we cheer ourselves.
Dr. Van Helsing says that by morning we shall reach the Borgo Pass.
The houses are very few here now, and the Professor says that the last horse we got
will have to go on with us, as we may not be able to change.
He got two in addition to the two we changed, so that now we have a rude four in hand.
The dear horses are patient and good and give us no trouble.
We are not worried with other travelers, and so even I can drive.
We shall get to the pass in daylight.
We do not want to arrive before.
So we take it easy and have each a long rest in turn.
Oh, what will tomorrow bring us?
We go to seek the place where my poor darling suffered so much.
God grant that we may be guided aright and he will deign to watch over my husband
and those dear to us both, and who are in such deadly peril.
As for me, I am not worthy in his sight.
Alas, I am unclean to his eyes and shall be until he may dine
and let me stand forth in his sight as one of those who have not incurred his wrath.
This to my old and true friend John Seward M.D.
Of Purefeet London, in case I may not see him, it may explain.
It is morning and I write by a fire which all night I have kept alive Madam Mina aiding me.
It is cold, cold, so cold that the gray heavy sky is full of snow
which when it falls will settle for all winter as the ground is hardening to receive it.
It seems to have affected Madam Mina.
She has been so heavy of head all day. She is not like herself.
She sleeps and sleeps and sleeps. She who is usual so alert have done literally nothing all the day.
She even have lost her appetite. She make no entry into her little diary.
She who writes so faithful every pause.
Something whisper to me that all is not well.
However, tonight she is more vee. Her long sleep all day have refreshed and restore her.
For now she is all sweet and bright as ever.
At sunset I try to hypnotize her, but alas with no effect.
The power has grown less and less with each day and tonight it fail me altogether.
Well, God's will be done whatever it may be and with so ever it may lead.
Now, to the historical. For as Madam Mina write not in her stenography,
I must in my coolest old fashion so that each day of us may not go unrecorded.
We got to the Borgo Pass just after sunrise yesterday morning.
When I saw the signs of the dawn I got ready for the hypnotism.
We stopped our carriage and got down so that there might be no disturbance.
I made a couch of furs and Madam Mina, lying down, yielded herself as usual,
but more slow and more short time than ever to the hypnotic sleep.
As before came the answer. Darkness and the swirling of water.
Then she awoke, bright and radiant, and we go on our way and soon reach the pass.
At this time and place she became on fire with zeal, some new guiding power being her manifested,
for she point to a road and say, This is the way.
How you know it, I ask. Of course I know it, she answer, and with a pause add,
Have not my Jonathan travelled it and wrote of his travel?
At first I think somewhat strange, but soon I see there be only one such by-road.
It is used by little and very different from the couch-road from the book Vainat de Bistrich,
which is more wide and hard and more of use.
So we come down this road, where we meet other ways not always where we sure that there are roads at all,
for they be neglect and light snow fall, the horses know and they only.
I give rein to them and they go on so patient.
By and by we find all the things which Jonathan have note in that wonderful diary of him.
Then we go on for long, long hours and hours.
At the first I tell Madame Mina to sleep. She try and she succeed.
She sleep all the time, till at last I feel myself too suspicious grow and attempt to wake her.
But she sleep on, and I may not wake her, though I try.
I do not wish to try too hard, lest I harm her, for I know that she suffer much, and sleep at times be all in all to her.
I think I drowse myself, for all the sudden I feel guilt, as though I have done something.
I find myself bolt up with the reins in my hand, and the good horses go along, jog, jog, just as ever.
I look down and find Madame Mina still asleep.
It is now not far off since that time, and o'er the snow the light of the snow and follow in big yellow flood,
so that we throw great long shadow on where the mountain rise so steep.
For we are going up and up, and all is so wild and rocky, as though it were the end of the world.
Then I arouse Madame Mina.
This time she wake with not much trouble, and then I try to put her to hypnotic sleep.
But she sleep not, being as though I were not.
Still I try and try, till all at once I find her and myself in the dark.
Still I look round and find that the sun has gone down.
Madame Mina laugh, and I turn and look at her.
She is now quite awake, and looks so well as I never saw her since that night at Carfax, when we first enter the Count's house.
I am amazed, and all is then, but she is so bright and tender and thoughtful to me, that I forget all fear.
I lie afire, for we have brought supply of wood with us.
She prepare food while I undo the horses and set them tether and shelter to feed.
Then, when I return to the fire, she have my supper ready.
I go to help her, but she smile and tell me that she have eaten already, that she was so hungry that she would not wait.
I lack it not, and I have grave doubts.
But I fear to fright her, and so am silent of it.
She help me, and I eat alone, and then we wrap in fur and lie beside the fire, and I tell her to sleep while I watch.
But presently, I forget all of washing, and when I sudden remember that I wash, I hide her, lying quiet but awake, and looking me with sober eyes.
Once, twice more the same occur, and I get much sleep to before morning.
When I wake, I try to hypnotize her, but alas, though she shut her eyes obedient, she may not sleep.
The sun rise up, and up, and up, and then sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that she will not wake.
I have to lift her up, and face her sleeping in the carriage where I've harnessed the horses and made all ready.
Madam still sleep, and she look in her sleep more healthy and more redder than before, and I lack it not.
And I am afraid, afraid, afraid, I am afraid of all the things, even to think that I must go on my way.
The stake we pay floor is life and death, or more than these, and we must not flinch.
5. November, morning
Let me be accurate in everything, for though you and I have seen strange things together, you may first think that I, then Helsing, am mad, that the many horrors and the so long strain on nerves had at last turned my brain.
All yesterday we travel, always getting closer to the mountains, and moving into a more and more wild and desert land,
where are great frowning precipices, and mush falling water, and nature seemed to have held some time her carnival.
Madam Mina still sleep and sleep, and though I did not have hunger and appeased it, I could not wake her, even for food.
I began to fear the fatal spell of the place was upon her, tainted as she is with a vampire baptism.
Well, said I to myself, if it be that she sleep all day, it shall also be that I do not sleep at night.
As we travel on the rough road, for a road of an ancient and imperfect kind there was, I held down my head and slept.
Again I wake with a sense of guilt, and of time pass, and found Madam Mina still sleeping, and the sun low down, but all was indeed changed.
The frowning mountains seemed further away, and we were near the top of a steep rising hill, on summit of which was such a castle that Jonathan told of in his diary.
At once I exhausted and feared. For now, for good or ill, the end was near.
I woke Madam Mina and again tried to hypnotize her, but alas, unavailing till too late.
Then, e'er the dark come upon us, for even after down the sun the heavens reflected the golden sun on the snow, and all was for a time in a great twilight.
I shook out the horses and fed them in what shelter I could.
Then I make a fire, and near it I make Madam Mina, now awake and more charming than ever, sit comfortable amid her rugs.
I had ready food, but she would not eat, simply saying that she had not hunger.
I did not press her, knowing her unavailingness, but I myself eat, for I must needs now be strong for all.
Then, with the fear on me of what might be, I drew a ring so big for her comfort, around where Madam Mina sat.
And o'er the ring I passed some of the weafer, in baroque fine, so that all was well guarded.
She sat still all the time, so still as one dead.
And she grew whiter and whiter till the snow was not more pale, and no water, she said.
But when I drew near she clung to me, and I could know that the poor soul shook her from head to feet with a tremor that was pain to feel.
I said to her presently, when she had grown more quiet, Will you not come over to the fire, for I wished to make a test of what she could.
She rose obedient, but when she made a step she stopped, and stood as one stricken.
Why not go on, I asked. She shook her head, and coming back sat down in her place.
Then, looking at me with open eyes, as of one waked from sleep, I cannot, and remained silent.
I rejoiced, for I knew that what she could not, none of those that we dreaded could.
Though there might be danger to her body, yet her soul was safe.
Presently the horses began to scream, and tore at their tethers till I came to them and quieted them.
When they did feel my hands on them, they whinnied low as in joy, and licked at my hands and were quiet for a time.
Many times, through the night, I come to them, till they arrive at the cold hour when all nature is at its lowest, and every time my coming was quiet to them.
In the cold hour the fire began to die, and I was the best stepping forth to replenish it, for now the snow came in flying sweeps, and with it a chill mist.
Even in the dark there was light of some kind, as the river is over snow, and it seemed as though the snow flurries and the wreaths of mist took shape as of women with trailing garments.
All was in dead grim silence, only that the horses whinnied and cowered as if in terror of the worst.
I began to fear, horrible fears, but then came to me this sense of safety in the ring wherein I stood.
I began, too, to think that my imaginings were of the nights and the gloom and the unrest that I had gone through, and all the terrible anxiety.
It was as though my memories of all of Jonathan's horrid experience were befooling me, for the snowflakes and the mist began to wheel and circle round,
till I could get as though a shadowy glimpse of those women that would have kissed him, and then the horses cowered lower and lower and moaned in terror as men do in pain.
Even the madness of fright was not to them, so they could not break away.
I feared for my dear Madame Mina when these weird figures drew nearer and circled round.
I looked at her, but she sat calm and smiled at me.
When I would have stepped to defy her to replenish it, she caught me and held me back, and whispered, like a voice that one hears in a dream so low it was,
No, no, do not go without. Here you are safe.
I turned to her, and looking in her eyes said, But you, it is for you that I fear.
Whereat she laughed, and laughed low and unreal, and said, Fear for me. Why fear for me? None safer in all the world from them than I am.
And as I wondered the meaning of her words, a puff of wind made the flame leap up, and I see the red scar on her forehead.
Then, alas, I knew.
Did I not, I would soon have learned, for the wheeling figures of mist and snow came closer, but keeping ever without the holy circle.
They began to materialize till, if God had not taken away my reason, for I saw it through my eyes.
There were before me in actual flesh the same three women that Jonathan saw in the room, when they would have kissed his throat.
I knew the swaying round forms, the bright hard eyes, the white teeth, the ruddy color, the voluptuous lips.
They smiled ever at poor dear Madame Mina, and as their laugh came through the silence of the night, they twined their arms and pointed to her,
and said in those so sweet tingling tones that Jonathan said were of the intolerable sweetness of the water glasses, Come sister, come to us, come.
In fear I turned to my poor Madame Mina, and my heart with gladness leapt like flame.
For oh, the terror in her sweet eyes, the repulsion, the horror, told a story to my heart that was all of hope.
God be thanked that she was not yet of them.
I seized some of the firewood which was by me, and holding out some of the wafer, advanced on them towards the fire.
They drew back before me and laughed their low horrid laugh.
I fed the fire and feared them not, for I knew that we were safe within the ring, which she could not leave no more than they could enter.
The horses had ceased to moan and lay still on the ground.
The snow fell on them softly and they grew whiter.
I knew that there was for the poor beast no more of terror.
And so it remained till the red of the dawn began to fall through the snow gloom.
I was desolate and afraid and full of woe and terror.
For when that beautiful sun began to climb the horizon, life was to me again.
At the first coming of the dawn, the horrid figures melted in the whirling mist and snow.
The wreaths of transparent gloom moved away towards the castle and were lost.
Instinctively, with the dawn coming, I turned to Madame Inna, intending to hypnotize her.
But she lay in a deep and sudden sleep from which I could not wake her.
I tried to hypnotize her through sleep, but she made no response, none at all, and the day broke.
I fear yet to stir. I have made my fire, and if seen the horses, they are all dead.
Today I have much to do here, and I keep waiting till the sun is up high, for there may be places where I must go.
Where there is sunlight, though snow and mist obscure it, will be to me a safety.
I will strengthen me with breakfast, and then I will do my terrible work.
Madame Inna still sleeps, and God be thanked, she is calm in her sleep.
Jonathan Harker's Journal
4 November, evening
The accident to the launch has been a terrible thing for us.
Only for it we should have overtaken the boat long ago, and by now my dear Mina would have been free.
I fear to think of her, off on the wolds, near that horrid place.
We have got horses, and we follow on the track.
I note this while Galdeming is getting ready. We have our arms.
The Sizgani must look out if they mean to fight.
Oh, if only Morris and Seward were with us. We must only hope.
If I write no more, good-bye Mina. God bless and keep you.
Dr. Seward's Diary
5 November, evening
With the dawn we saw the body of Sizgani before us dashing away from the river with their leader-wagon.
They surrounded it in a cluster and hurried along as though beset.
The snow is falling lightly and there is strange excitement in the air.
It may be our own feelings, but the depression is strange.
Far off I hear the howling of wolves.
The snow brings them down from the mountains, and there are dangers to all of us and from all sides.
The horses are nearly ready and we are soon off.
We ride to death of someone. God alone knows who, or where, or what, or when, or how it may be.
Dr. Van Helsing's Memorandum
5 November, afternoon
I am at least sane. Thank God for that mercy at all events, though the proving it has been dreadful.
When I left Madame Mina, sleeping within the holy circle, I took my way to the castle.
The blacksmith-hammer which I took in the carriage from Varetsi was useful.
Though the doors were all open, I broke them off the rusty hinges, lest some ill-intent or ill-chant should close them, so that being entered I might not get out.
Jonathan's bitter experience served me here.
By memory of his diary I found my way to the old chapel, for I knew that here my work lay.
The air was oppressive. It seemed as if there were some sulfurous fume, which at times made me dizzy.
Either there was a roaring in my ears, or I heard afar off the howl of wolves.
Then I bethought me of my dear Madame Mina, and I was in terrible plight. The dilemma had me between his horns.
Her I had dared not take into this place, but left safe from the vampire and that holy circle, and yet even there would be the wolf.
I resolved me that my work lay here, and that as to the wolves we must submit if it were God's will.
At any rate it was only death and freedom beyond, so I did choose for her.
Had it but been for myself the choice had been easy.
The maw of the wolf were better to rest in than the grave of the vampire, so I made my choice to go on with my work.
I knew that there were at least three graves to find, graves that are inhabit, so I search and search and I find one of them.
She lay in her vampire sleep, so full of life and voluptuous beauty that I shudder as though I have come to do murder.
I doubt not that in the old time, when such things were, many a man who set forth to do such a task as mine, found at the last his heart fail him, and then his nerve.
So he delay and delay and delay till the mere beauty and the fascination of the wanting undead have hypnotized him, and he remain on and on till sunset come and the vampire sleep be over.
Then the beautiful eyes of the fair woman open and look love, and the voluptuous mouth present to a kiss, and the man is weak, and there remain one more victim in the vampire fold, one more to swell the grim and grisly ranks of the undead.
There is some fascination, surely, when I am moved by the mere presence of such a one, even lying as she lay in a tomb threaded with age and heavy with the dust of centuries, though there be that horrid odor such as the lairs of the Count have had.
Yes, I was moved. I, Van Helsing, with all my purpose and my motive for hate, I was moved to a yearning for delay which seemed to paralyze my faculties and to clog my very soul.
It may have been that the need of natural sleep and the strange oppression of the air were beginning to overcome me. Certain it was that I was lapsing into sleep, the open-eyed sleep of one who yields to a sweet fascination.
When there came through the window snow stilled a long low wail, so full of woe and pity that it woke me like the sound of a clarion, for it was the voice of my dear Madame Mina that I heard.
Then I braced myself again to my horrid task and found by retching away tomb-tops one other of the sisters, the other dark one. I dared not pause to look on her as I had on her sister, thus once more I should begin to be enthralled.
But I go on searching, until presently I find in a high great tomb as if made to be one such beloved that other fair sister. Like Jonathan I have seen to gather herself out of the atoms of the mist.
She was so fairer to look on, so radiantly beautiful, so exquisitely voluptuous, that the very instinct of man in me, which calls some of my sex to love and to protect one of hers, made my head whirl with new emotion.
But God be thanked, that so the wail of my dear Madame Mina had not died out of my ears, and before the spell could be wrought further upon me I had nerved myself to my wild work. By this time I had searched all the tombs in the chapel as far as I could tell.
And as there had been only three of these undead phantoms around us in the night, I took it that there were no more of active undead existent. There was one great tomb more lordly than all the rest, huge it was and nobly proportioned. On it was but one word.
DRACULA
Then began my terrible task, and I dreaded it. Had it been but one, it would have been easy, comparative, but three, to begin twice more after I had been through a deed of horror. But it was terrible with the sweet Miss Lucy.
What would it not be with these strange ones who had survived through centuries, and who would have been strengthened by the passing of the years? Who would, if they could, have fought for their foul lives?
Oh, my friend Jean, it was bushier work. Had I not been nerved by thoughts of other dead, and of the living over whom hung such a pall of fear, I could not have gone on.
I trembled and trembled even yet, though till all was over, God be thanked, my nerve did stand. Had I not seen the repose in the first place, and the gladness that stole over it just ere the final dissolution came, as realization that the soul had been won, I could not have gone farther with my bushery.
I could not have endured the horrid screeching as the stake drove home, the plunging of writhing form and the lips of bloody foam.
I should have fled in terror and left my work undone, but it is over, and the poor souls, I can pity them now and weep, as I think of them placid, each in her full sleep of death for a short moment there fading.
For, friend Jean, hardly had my knife severed the head of each before the whole body began to melt away and crumble into its native dust, as though death that should have come centuries ago had at last asserted himself and say at once and loud, I am here.
Before I left the castle I saw fixies' entrances that never more can the Count enter there undead.
When I stepped into the circle where Madame Mina slept, she woke from her sleep, and seeing me cried out in pain that I had endured too much.
Come, she said, come away from this awful place. Let us go to meet my husband, who is, I know, coming towards us.
She was looking thin and pale and weak, but her eyes were pure and glowed with fervour.
I was glad to see her paleness and her illness, for my mind was full of the fresh horror of that ruddy vampire sleep.
And so with trust and hope and yet full of fear we go eastward to meet our friends, and him, will Madame Mina tell me that she know are coming to meet us.
Mina Harker's Journal
6 November
It was late in the afternoon when the Professor and I took our way towards the east, whence I knew Jonathan was coming.
We did not go fast, though the way was steeply downhill, for we had to take heavy rugs and wraps with us.
We dare not face the possibility of being left without warmth in the cold and the snow.
We had to take some of our provisions too, for we were in perfect desolation, and as far as we could see through the snowfall, there was not even the sign of habitation.
When we had gone about a mile, I was tired with the heavy walking and sat down to rest.
Then we looked back and saw where the clear line of Dracula's Castle cut the sky, for we were so deep under the hill whereon it was set, that the angle of perspective of the Carpathian Mountains was far below it.
We saw it in all its grandeur, perched a thousand feet on the summit of a sheer precipice, and was seemingly a great gap between it and the steep of the adjacent mountain on any side.
There was something wild and uncanny about the place. We could hear the distant howling of wolves.
They were far off, but the sound, even though coming muffled through the deadening snowfall, was full of terror.
I knew from the way Dr. Van Helsing was searching about that he was trying to seek some strategic point where we'd be less exposed in case of attack.
The rough roadway still led downwards. We could trace it through the drifted snow.
In a little while, the Professor signaled to me, so I got up and joined him.
He had found a wonderful spot, a sort of natural hollow in a rock, with an entrance like a doorway between two boulders.
He took me by the hand and drew me in.
See, he said, here you will be in shelter, and if the wolves do come I can meet them one by one.
He brought in our furs, and made a snug nest for me, and got out some provisions and forced them upon me.
But I could not eat. To even try to do so was repulsive to me, and much as I would have liked to please him, I could not bring myself to the attempt.
He looked very sad, but did not reproach me.
Taking his field glasses from the case, he stood on top of the rock, and began to search the horizon.
Suddenly, he called out,
Look! Madam Nina, look, look!
I sprang up, and stood beside him on the rock. He handed me his glasses and pointed.
The snow was now falling more heavily, and swirled about fiercely, for a high wind was beginning to blow.
However, there were times when there were pauses between the snow flurries, and I could see a long way round.
From the height where we were, it was possible to see a great distance, and far off, beyond the white waste of snow, I could see the river lying like a black ribbon, in kinks and curls as it wound its way.
Straight in front of us, and not far off, in fact so near that I wondered we had not noticed before, came a group of mounted men hurrying along.
In the midst of them was a cart, a long leader-wagon, which swept from side to side like a dog's tail wagging, with each stern inequality of the road.
Outlined against the snow as they were, I could see from the men's clothes that they were peasants or gypsies of some kind.
On the cart was a great square chest. My heart leaped as I saw it, for I felt that the end was coming.
The evening was now drawing close, and well I knew that at sunset, the Thing, which was till then imprisoned there, would take new freedom, and could in any of many forms elude pursuit.
In fear, I turned to the Professor. To my consternation, however, he was not there.
An instant later, I saw him below me. Round the rock, he had drawn a circle, such as we had found shelter in last night.
When he had completed it, he stood beside me again, saying, At least you shall be safe from him.
He took the glasses from me, and at the next lull of the snow swept the whole space below us.
See, he said, they come quickly. They are flogging the horses and galloping as hard as they can.
He paused, and went on in a hollow voice. They are racing for the sunset. We may be too late. God's will be done.
Down came another blinding rush of driving snow, and the whole landscape was blotted out.
It soon passed, however, and once more his glasses were fixed on the plain.
Then came a sudden cry. Look, look, look. See, two horsemen follow fast, coming up from the south.
It must be Quincy and John. Take the glass. Look before the snow blots it all out.
I took it, and looked. The two men might be Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris.
I knew at all events that neither of them was Jonathan. At the same time, I knew that Jonathan was not far off.
Looking around, I saw on the north side of the coming party two other men, riding at breakneck speed.
One of them, I knew, was Jonathan, and the other I took. Of course, to be Lord Galdiming.
They too were pursuing the party with the cart.
When I told the professor, he shouted in glee like a schoolboy, and after looking intently till a snowfall made sight impossible,
he laid his Winchester rifle ready for use against the boulder at the opening of our shelter.
They are all converging, he said. When the time comes, we shall have gypsies on all sides.
I got out my revolver ready to hand, for whilst we were speaking the howling of wolves came louder and closer.
When the snowstorm abated a moment, we looked again.
It was strange to see the snow falling in such heavy flakes close to us.
And beyond, the sun shining more and more brightly as it sank down towards the far mountaintops, sweeping the glass all around us.
I could see here and there dots moving singly and in twos and threes in larger numbers.
The wolves were gathering for their prey.
Every instant seemed an age whilst we waited. The wind came now in fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with fury as it swept upon us in circling eddies.
At times we could not see in arm's length before us, but at others, as the hollow sounding wind swept by us,
it seemed to clear the airspace around us so that we could see afar off.
We had of late become so accustomed to watch for sunrise and sunset that we knew with fair accuracy when it would be,
and we knew that before long the sun would set.
It was hard to believe that by our watches it was less than an hour that we waited in that rocky shelter
before the various bodies began to converge close upon us.
The wind came now with fiercer and more bitter sweeps and more steadily from the north.
It seemingly had driven the snow clouds from us, for with only occasional bursts the snow fell.
We could distinguish clearly the individuals of each party, the pursued and the pursuers.
Strangely enough, those pursued did not seem to realize it, or at least to care that they were pursued.
They seemed, however, to hasten with redoubled speed as the sun dropped lower and lower on the mountaintops.
Closer and closer they drew. The professor and I crouched down behind our rock and held our weapons ready.
I could see that he was determined that they should not pass.
One and all were quite unaware of our presence. All at once two voices shouted out to halt.
One was my Jonathan's, raised in a high key of passion, the other Mr. Morris's strong resolute tone of quiet command.
The gypsies may not have known the language, but there was no mistaking the tone, in whatever tongue the words were spoken.
Instinctively they reigned in, and at the instant Lord Galdeming and Jonathan dashed up at one side and Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris on the other.
The leader of the gypsies, a splendid-looking fellow who sat his horse like a centaur, waved them back, and in a fierce voice gave to his companions some word to proceed.
They lashed the horses which sprang forward, but the four men raised their Winchester rifles, and in an unmistakable way commanded them to stop.
At the same moment Dr. Van Helsing and I arose behind the rock and pointed our weapons at them.
Seeing that they were surrounded, the men tightened their reins and drew up.
The leader turned to them and gave a word, at which every man of the gypsy party drew what weapon he carried, knife or pistol, and held himself in readiness to attack.
Issue was joined in an instant.
The leader, with a quick movement of his reins, threw his horse out in front and pointed first to the sun, now close down on the hilltops, and then to the castle, said something which I did not understand.
For answer, all four men of our party threw themselves from their horses and dashed towards the cart.
I should have felt terrible fear at seeing Jonathan in such danger, but that the ardor of battle must have been upon me as well as the rest of them.
I felt no fear, but only a wild, surging desire to do something.
Seeing the quick movement of our parties, the leader of the gypsies gave a command.
His men instantly formed round the cart in a sort of undisciplined endeavor, each one shouldering and pushing the other in his eagerness to carry out the order.
In the midst of this, I could see that Jonathan on one side of the ring of men, and Quincy on the other, were forcing away to the cart.
It was evident that they were bent on finishing their task before the sun should set.
Nothing seemed to stop or even to hinder them.
Neither the leveled weapons, nor the flashing knives of the gypsies in front, nor the howling of the wolves behind, appeared to even attract their attention.
Jonathan's impetuosity, and the manifest signalous of his purpose, seemed to overaw those in front of him.
Instinctively, they cowered aside and let him pass.
In an instant, he had jumped upon the cart, and with a strength which seemed incredible, raised the great box and flung it over the wheel to the ground.
In the meantime, Mr. Morris had had to use force to pass through his side of the ring of sitsgani.
All the time, I had been breathlessly watching Jonathan.
I had, with the tail of my eye, seen him pressing desperately forward, and had seen the knives of the gypsies flash as he won away through them, and they cut at him.
He had parried with his great bowie knife, and at first I thought that he too had come through in safety.
But as he sprang beside Jonathan, who had by now jumped from the cart, I could see that his left hand he was clutching at his side, and that the blood was spurting through his fingers.
He did not delay notwithstanding this, for as Jonathan, with desperate energy, attacked one end of the chest, attempting to prise off the lid with his great kukri knife, he attacked the other frantically with his bowie.
Under the efforts of both men, the lid began to yield.
The nails drew with a screeching sound, and the top of the box was thrown back.
By this time, the gypsies, seeing themselves covered by the Winchesters, and at the mercy of Lord Galdeming and Dr. Seward, had given in and made no further resistance.
The sun was almost down on the mountaintops, and the shadows of the whole group fell upon the snow.
I saw the Count lying within the box upon the earth, some of which the rude falling from the cart had scattered over him.
He was deathly pale, just like a waxen image, and the red eyes glared with the horrible, vindictive look which I knew so well.
As I looked, the eyes saw the sinking sun, and the look of hate in them turned to triumph.
But, on the instant, came the sweep and flash of Jonathan's great knife.
I shrieked as I saw it shear through the throat, whilst at the same moment, Mr. Morris's bowie knife plunged into the heart.
It was like a miracle, but before our very eyes, and almost in the drawing of a breath, the whole body crumbled into dust and passed from our sight.
I shall be glad as long as I live, that even in that moment of final dissolution, there was in that face a look of peace, such as I never could have imagined might have rested there.
The castle of Dracula now stood out against the red sky, and every stone of its broken battlements was articulated against the light of the setting sun.
The gypsies, taking us in some way the cause of the extraordinary disappearance of the dead man, turned, without a word, and rode away as if for their lives.
Those who were unmounted jumped upon the leader-wagon, and shouted to the horsemen not to desert them.
The wolves, which had withdrawn to a safe distance, followed in their wake, leaving us alone.
Mr. Morris, who had sunk to the ground, leaned on his elbow, holding his hand pressed to his side. The blood still gushed through his fingers.
I flew to him, for the Holy Circle did not now keep me back. So did the two doctors.
Jonathan knelt behind him, and the wounded man laid back his head on his shoulder. With a sigh he took, with a feeble effort, my hand and that of his own which was unstained.
He must have seen the anguish of my heart and my face, for he smiled at me and said, I am only too happy to have been of service.
Oh, God! he cried suddenly, struggling to a sitting posture and pointing to me. It was worth for this to die. Look! Look!
The sun was now right down upon the mountaintop, and the red gleams fell upon my face, so that it was bathed in rosy light.
With one impulse the men sank on their knees, and a deep and earnest amen broke from all as their eyes followed the pointing of his finger.
The dying man spoke. Now God be thanked that all has not been in vain. See! the snow was not more stainless than her forehead. The curse has passed away.
And to our bitter grief, with a smile and in silence, he died a gallant gentleman.
I say to Mina and to me that our boy's birthday is the same day as that on which Quincy Morris died. His mother holds, I know, the secret belief that some of our brave friend's spirit has passed into him.
His bundle of names links our little band of men together, but we call him Quincy.
In the summer of this year we made a journey to Transylvania and went over the old ground which was and is to us so full of vivid and terrible memories.
It is almost impossible to believe that the things which we had seen with our own eyes and heard with our own ears were living truths.
Every trace of all that had been was blotted out. A castle stood as before, reared high above a waste of desolation.
When we got home we were talking of the old time which we could all look back on without despair, for Galdeming and Seward are both happily married.
I took the papers from the safe where they had been ever since our return so long ago.
We were struck with the fact that in all the mass of material of which the record is composed there is hardly one authentic document, nothing but a mass of typewriting, except the later notebooks of Mina and Seward and myself, and Van Helsing's memorandum.
We could hardly ask anyone, even did we wish to, to accept these as proofs of so wild a story.
Van Helsing summed it all up as he said with our boy on his knee.
We want no proofs. We ask none to believe us. This boy will someday know what the brave and gallant woman his mother is.
Already he know her sweetness and loving care. Later on he will understand how some men so loved her that they did dare much for her sake.
Marlowe Diane February 18-22 2006 Piscid West, Prince Edward Island